GED® TEST
PREP
2022–2023

GED® is a registered trademark of the American Council on Education (ACE) and may not be used
without permission.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Special thanks to the team that made this book possible:
Arthur Ahn, Laura Aitcheson, Mikhail Alexeeff, Gina Allison, Kim Bowers, Erik Bowman, Julie Choi,
Margaret Crane, Alisha Crowley, Lola Disparte, Boris Dvorkin, Paula Fleming, Tom Flesher, Joanna
Graham, Allison Harm, Gar Hong, Kevin Jacobson, Wyatt Kent, Rebecca Knauer, Jennifer Land,
Heather Maigur, Terrence McGovern, Terrence McMullen, Eli Meyer, Kathy Osmus, Anthony Parr,
Rachel Pearsall, Neha Rao, Rachel Reina, Teresa Rupp, Scott Safir, Kathryn Sollenberger, Glen Stohr,
Alexandra Strelka, Lee Weiss, Heather Wilcox, and many others who have shaped this book over the
years.
GED® is a registered trademark of the American Council on Education (ACE) and may not be used
without permission. The GED® and GED Testing Service® brands are administered by GED Testing
Service LLC under license. ACE and GED Testing Service LLC have not approved, authorized,
endorsed, been involved in the development of, or licensed the substantive content of this material.
This publication is designed to provide accurate information in regard to the subject matter covered as
of its publication date, with the understanding that knowledge and best practice constantly evolve. The
publisher is not engaged in rendering medical, legal, accounting, or other professional service. If
medical or legal advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent professional
should be sought. This publication is not intended for use in clinical practice or the delivery of medical
care. To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the Editors assume any liability for any
injury and/or damage to persons or property arising out of or related to any use of the material
contained in this book.
© 2021 Kaplan, Inc.
Published by Kaplan Publishing, a division of Kaplan, Inc.
750 Third Avenue
New York, NY 10017
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment of the
required fees, you have been granted the non-exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the
text of this eBook on screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, downloaded,
decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval
system, in any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter
invented, without the express written permission of the publisher.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
ISBN: 978-1-5062-8212-1
Kaplan Publishing books are available at special quantity discounts to use for sales promotions,
employee premiums, or educational purposes. For more information or to purchase books, please call
the Simon & Schuster special sales department at 866-506-1949.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Kaplan’s GED® Test Book and Online Center
Getting Started
GED® Test Overview
GED® Computer-Based Testing
Kaplan GED® Test Study Planners
GED® Pretests
Reasoning through Language Arts Pretest
Mathematical Reasoning Pretest
Social Studies Pretest
Science Pretest
UNIT 1: REASONING THROUGH LANGUAGE ARTS
About the Test
Chapter 1: Interpreting Nonfiction and Informational Text
Lesson 1: Main Ideas and Details
Lesson 2: Restatement and Summary
Lesson 3: Application of Ideas
Lesson 4: Cause and Effect
Lesson 5: Compare and Contrast
Lesson 6: Conclusions and Generalizations
Lesson 7: Word Choice
Lesson 8: Writer’s Tone and Point of View
Lesson 9: Text Structure
Interpreting Nonfiction and Informational Text Practice Questions
Chapter 2: Analyzing Nonfiction and Informational Text

Lesson 1: Purpose of Text
Lesson 2: Effectiveness of Argument
Lesson 3: Validity of Arguments
Lesson 4: Text Related by Theme or Topic
Lesson 5: Texts with Opposing Arguments
Lesson 6: Texts with Related Graphic Information
Analyzing Nonfiction and Informational Text Practice Questions
Chapter 3: Interpreting Fiction
Lesson 1: Plot Elements
Lesson 2: Inferences
Lesson 3: Character
Lesson 4: Theme
Lesson 5: Style and Point of View
Lesson 6: Figurative Language
Interpreting Fiction Practice Questions
Chapter 4: Writing Effective Sentences
Lesson 1: Simple Sentences
Lesson 2: Compound and Complex Sentences
Lesson 3: Run-Ons and Comma Splices
Lesson 4: Subordinate Ideas
Lesson 5: Modify Ideas
Lesson 6: Parallel Structure
Writing Effective Sentences Practice Questions
Chapter 5: Connecting Ideas
Lesson 1: Organize Ideas into Paragraphs
Lesson 2: Use Logical Order and Relevant Ideas
Lesson 3: Relate Sentences and Paragraphs
Connecting Ideas Practice Questions
Chapter 6: Writing About Text
Lesson 1: Unpack the Writing Prompt
Lesson 2: Identify a Writer’s Arguments and Assumptions
Lesson 3: Develop a Thesis Statement
Lesson 4: Collect Supporting Evidence
Lesson 5: Plan Your Response

Lesson 6: Draft Your Response
Lesson 7: Revise and Edit Your Response
Writing About Text Practice
Chapter 7: Polishing Your Writing
Lesson 1: Strengthen Sentences
Lesson 2: Improve Organization
Lesson 3: Word Choice
Polishing Your Writing Practice Questions
Chapter 8: Using Grammar Correctly
Lesson 1: Noun and Pronoun Agreement
Lesson 2: Verb Forms and Tenses
Lesson 3: Subject-Verb Agreement
Using Grammar Correctly Practice Questions
Chapter 9: Using Writing Mechanics
Lesson 1: Comma Use
Lesson 2: Capitalization
Lesson 3: Possessives and Contractions
Lesson 4: Homonyms
Using Writing Mechanics Practice Questions
UNIT 2: MATHEMATICAL REASONING
About the Test
Chapter 1: Number Sense and Problem Solving
Lesson 1: Compare and Order Numbers
Lesson 2: Whole Number Operations
Lesson 3: GED® Test Calculator Skills
Lesson 4: Word Problems
Lesson 5: Distance and Cost
Number Sense and Problem Solving Practice Questions
Chapter 2: Decimals and Fractions
Lesson 1: Decimal Basics
Lesson 2: Decimal Operations

Lesson 3: Fraction Basics
Lesson 4: Fraction Operations
Lesson 5: Fraction and Decimal Equivalencies
Lesson 6: Decimals and Fractions on the Number Line
Lesson 7: Decimal and Fraction Calculator Skills
Decimals and Fractions Practice Questions
Chapter 3: Ratio, Proportion, and Percent
Lesson 1: Ratio and Proportion
Lesson 2: Percents
Lesson 3: Using the Percent Formula
Lesson 4: Percent Calculator Skills
Lesson 5: Simple Interest
Lesson 6: Percent of Change
Ratio, Proportion, and Percent Practice Questions
Chapter 4: Data, Statistics, and Probability
Lesson 1: Tables and Pictographs
Lesson 2: Bar and Line Graphs
Lesson 3: Circle Graphs
Lesson 4: Measures of Central Tendency
Lesson 5: Line Plots
Lesson 6: Histograms
Lesson 7: Probability
Lesson 8: Combinations
Lesson 9: Permutations
Lesson 10: Compare Proportions in Different Formats
Data, Statistics, and Probability Practice Questions
Chapter 5: Algebra Basics, Expressions, and Polynomials
Lesson 1: The Number Line and Signed Numbers
Lesson 2: Powers and Roots
Lesson 3: Scientific Notation
Lesson 4: Order of Operations
Lesson 5: Absolute Value
Lesson 6: Algebraic Expressions
Lesson 7: Expressions and Calculator Skills

Lesson 8: Understand Polynomials
Lesson 9: Simplify Polynomials
Lesson 10: Add and Subtract Polynomials
Lesson 11: Multiply Polynomials
Lesson 12: Divide Polynomials
Algebra Basics, Expressions, and Polynomials Practice Questions
Chapter 6: Equations, Inequalities, and Functions
Lesson 1: Equations
Lesson 2: Equation Word Problems
Lesson 3: Inequalities
Lesson 4: Quadratic Equations
Lesson 5: Algebra Problem Solving
Lesson 6: The Coordinate Plane
Lesson 7: Graphing a Line
Lesson 8: Slope of a Line
Lesson 9: Slope and Equations
Lesson 10: Systems of Linear Equations
Lesson 11: Patterns and Functions
Lesson 12: Function Applications
Lesson 13: Function Notation
Equations, Inequalities, and Functions Practice Questions
Chapter 7: Geometry
Lesson 1: Plane Figures
Lesson 2: Triangles
Lesson 3: Pythagorean Relationship
Lesson 4: Perimeter and Area
Lesson 5: Circles
Lesson 6: Volume
Lesson 7: Surface Area
Lesson 8: Combined Figures
Lesson 9: Geometry Calculator Skills
Geometry Practice Questions
GED® Test Mathematics Formula Sheet
UNIT 3: SOCIAL STUDIES

About the Test
Chapter 1: Social Studies Practices
Lesson 1: Determine Central Idea and Draw Conclusions
Lesson 2: Interpret Words and Ideas
Lesson 3: Analyze Author’s Purpose and Point of View
Lesson 4: Evaluate Author’s Reasoning and Evidence
Lesson 5: Analyze Relationships Between Materials
Lesson 6: Interpret Data and Statistics
Social Studies Practices Practice Questions
Chapter 2: U.S. History
Lesson 1: Exploration, Colonialism, and the American Revolution
Lesson 2: Westward Expansion, the Civil War, and Reconstruction
Lesson 3: Industrialization, Immigration, and the Progressive Era
Lesson 4: The United States as an Emerging World Power
Lesson 5: The Cold War and the Civil Rights Era
U.S. History Practice Questions
Chapter 3: Civics and Government
Lesson 1: Historic Basis for U.S. System
Lesson 2: Constitutional Government
Lesson 3: Levels and Branches of Government
Lesson 4: The Electoral System
Lesson 5: The Role of the Citizen
Civics and Government Practice Questions
Chapter 4: Economics
Lesson 1: Basic Economics Concepts
Lesson 2: The U.S. Economic System
Lesson 3: The Economy and the U.S. Government
Lesson 4: Labor and Consumer Issues
Economics Practice Questions
Chapter 5: Geography and the World
Lesson 1: Early Civilizations
Lesson 2: Feudalism to Nation States
Lesson 3: The Age of Revolutions

Lesson 4: Exploration, Colonialism, and Wars
Lesson 5: Humans and the Environment
Lesson 6: Using Resources Wisely
Geography and the World Practice Questions
UNIT 4: SCIENCE
About the Test
Chapter 1: Science Practices
Lesson 1: Comprehend Scientific Presentations
Lesson 2: Use the Scientific Method
Lesson 3: Reason with Scientific Information
Lesson 4: Express and Apply Scientific Information
Lesson 5: Use Statistics and Probability
Lesson 6: Apply Scientific Formulas
Science Practices Practice Questions
Chapter 2: Life Science
Lesson 1: Cell Structures and Functions
Lesson 2: Cell Processes and Energy
Lesson 3: Human Body Systems
Lesson 4: Health Issues
Lesson 5: Reproduction and Heredity
Lesson 6: Modern Genetics
Lesson 7: Evolution and Natural Selection
Lesson 8: Organization of Ecosystems
Life Science Practice Questions
Chapter 3: Earth and Space Science
Lesson 1: Structure of Earth
Lesson 2: Earth’s Resources
Lesson 3: Weather and Climate
Lesson 4: Earth in the Solar System
Lesson 5: The Expanding Universe
Earth and Space Science Practice Questions
Chapter 4: Physical Science

Lesson 1: Atoms and Molecules
Lesson 2: Properties and States of Matter
Lesson 3: Chemical Reactions
Lesson 4: The Nature of Energy
Lesson 5: Motion and Forces
Lesson 6: Electricity and Magnetism
Physical Science Practice Questions
GED® Practice Tests
Reasoning through Language Arts Practice Test
Mathematical Reasoning Practice Test
Social Studies Practice Test
Science Practice Test
GED® Answers and Explanations
GED® Pretest Answers and Explanations
GED® Unit Answers and Explanations
GED® Practice Test Answers and Explanations
GED® Test Resources
Reasoning through Language Arts Extended Response Evaluation Guide
GED® Test Mathematics Formula Sheet
TI-30XS Calculator Reference Sheet
Æ Symbol Tool Explanation

KAPLAN’S GED® TEST BOOK AND
ONLINE CENTER
Congratulations on your decision to pursue high school equivalency and
thank you for choosing Kaplan for your GED® Test preparation.
You’ve made the right choice in acquiring this book—you’re now armed
with a comprehensive GED® Test preparation program that is the result of
years of researching the GED® Tests and teaching thousands of students the
skills they need to succeed. You have what you need to pass the GED® Tests
and score higher; the next step is to make the commitment to your study plan.
The next section will tell you everything you need to know to take advantage
of your book and your Online Center.

YOUR BOOK
This book contains a complete study program, including the following:
Detailed instruction covering the essential concepts for Reasoning
through Language Arts, Mathematical Reasoning, Social Studies, and
Science
Time-tested and effective methods and strategies for every question
type
Pretests featuring questions from all sections of the GED® Tests,
designed to help you diagnose your strengths and weaknesses
Hundreds of practice questions, followed by answer explanations
A timed, full-length Practice Test for each subject

YOUR ONLINE CENTER

Your Kaplan Online Center gives you access to additional instruction and
practice materials to reinforce key concepts and sharpen your GED® Test
skills. The following list summarizes the resources available to you:
An additional full-length Practice Test for each subject, so that you can
practice the computer-based question formats used on the actual test
Analysis of your performance on each section of your practice tests,
including detailed answer explanations for the computer-based practice
test
Plenty of video lessons featuring Kaplan’s top instructors

GETTING STARTED
Studying for the GED® Test can be daunting, and with so many resources
available to you, it may not be clear where to begin. Don’t worry; we’ll break
it down one step at a time, just as we will with the GED® Test questions that
you will soon be on your way to mastering.

GETTING STARTED
1. Take the diagnostic Pretests.
2. Create a study plan.
3. Register your Online Center.
4. Learn and practice using both this book and your Online Center.
5. Work through the Practice Tests to gauge your progress.

STEP 1: TAKE THE DIAGNOSTIC PRETESTS
It’s essential to take the diagnostic Pretests before you begin to study. Doing
so will give you the initial feedback and diagnostic information that you will
need to achieve your maximum score. Place enough importance on
completing the Pretests—turn off your cell phone, give the tests your full
attention, and learn from your performance.
Once you have finished your Pretests, check your answers starting on page
632. Mark the questions that you got correct and carefully read the answer
explanations of those that you got wrong.
For each test, make a list of the questions that you got correct and use that list
to fill out the Kaplan GED® Test Study Planners that begin on page xviii. Use
the results to target your weak areas.
Review the detailed answer explanations in the book to better understand

your performance. Look for patterns in the questions you answered correctly
and incorrectly. Were you stronger in some areas than others? This analysis
will help you target your study time to specific concepts.

STEP 2: CREATE A STUDY PLAN
Use what you’ve learned from your initial Pretest to identify areas for closer
study and practice. Take time to familiarize yourself with the key components
of your book and Online Center. Think about how many hours you can
consistently devote to GED® Test study.
Schedule time for study, practice, and review. It works best for many people
to block out short, frequent periods of study time throughout the week. Check
in with yourself frequently to make sure you’re not falling behind your plan
or forgetting about any of your resources.

STEP 3: REGISTER YOUR ONLINE CENTER
Register your Online Center using these simple steps:
1. Go to https://kaptest.com/booksonline.
2. Follow the on-screen instructions for GED®. Please have your book
available.
Access to the Online Center is limited to the original owner of this book and
is nontransferable. Kaplan is not responsible for providing access to the
Online Center to customers who purchase or borrow used copies of this book.
Access to the Online Center expires one year after you register.

STEP 4: LEARN AND PRACTICE
Your book and Online Center come with many opportunities to develop and
practice the skills you’ll need on Test Day. Depending on how much time
you have to study, you can do this work methodically, covering every unit

and lesson, or you can focus your study on those content areas that are most
challenging to you. You will inevitably need more work in some areas than in
others, but the more thoroughly you prepare, the better your score will be.
Initially, your practice should focus on mastering the needed skills and not on
timing. Add timing to your practice as you become familiar with skills and
methods.

STEP 5: WORK THROUGH THE PRACTICE TESTS
As you move through your GED® studies, take advantage of both the fulllength Practice Test available in this book and also the one in your Online
Center.
Review your Practice Test results thoroughly to make sure you are addressing
the areas that are most important to your score. Allot time to review the
detailed explanations so that you can learn from your mistakes and review the
relevant chapters in the book for additional study.

Looking for more?
If you find that you would like access to more of Kaplan’s instructional
content or practice material, look into our GED Live and Self-Paced course
options available at https://kaptest.com/GED.
Thanks for choosing Kaplan. We wish you the best of luck on your journey to
completing your high school equivalency and taking a vital step toward
college and career readiness.

GED® TEST OVERVIEW
The GED® Test is a widely used examination that demonstrates high school
equivalency as well as college and career readiness. It includes the reading,
writing, thinking, and problem-solving skills needed for postsecondary
educational programs and for the world of work. This means that your high
school equivalency diploma is not an end in itself—it is the springboard to
more education, to better-paying jobs, and to more rewarding career paths.

TAKE FOUR SUBTESTS IN FOUR CONTENT AREAS
Reasoning through Language Arts—2.5 hours (one 10-minute break
between sections 2 and 3)
Roughly 50–55 questions
Includes 1 extended written response to reading passages—up to 45
minutes
Mathematical Reasoning—1 hour, 55 minutes (one 3-minute break
between parts to retrieve your calculator)
Roughly 40–45 questions
First section—5 questions, no calculator allowed
Second section—calculator allowed (Texas Instruments TI-30XS
MultiView™ calculator)
Social Studies—1 hour, 10 minutes
Science—1.5 hours
You can read detailed information about each test in the four About the Test
sections that introduce each content area in this book.

RESPOND TO SIX COMPUTER-BASED QUESTION

FORMATS
To test a range of skills, the GED® Test uses a variety of computer-based
question formats. You will see examples of each type of question in GED®
Computer-Based Testing and in the four About the Test sections. When you
take the test, you will use these question formats:
Multiple-choice—click to choose from four choices (A through D).
Fill-in-the-blank—type a word, a phrase, or numbers in a box.
Drag-and-drop—move words, numbers, or objects across the computer
screen.
Drop-down—select from menus embedded in text on the computer
screen.
Hot-spot—click on graphics on the computer.
Extended Response—compose a well-developed and supported
response to passages or graphics or a combination of the two.

READ AND WRITE THROUGHOUT THE TEST
You will read and interpret passages and word problems on all four tests. In
addition, two out of four subtests (Reasoning through Language Arts and
Science) require that you read a passage or two and compose a response
about what you have read.
The type of writing that you will use is called evidence-based writing, which
means that you need to cite specific evidence from the readings in your
response. This is a key characteristic of the type of writing that is required in
workplaces and in educational programs. This book contains special lessons
and practice activities to help you write effectively on all three of the
subtests.

PERFORM MATH SKILLS THROUGHOUT THE TEST
In addition to the questions on the Mathematical Reasoning Test, math items
also appear on the Social Studies Test and the Science Test. Both of those

sections of this book have specific instruction and practice activities to help
you apply math skills to social studies and science materials.
On all three of these tests, you may use either a handheld or an on-screen
version of the Texas Instruments TI-30XS MultiView™ calculator to use
with math items. If you wish to use a handheld version of the calculator, you
may need to take one with you on test day. You are strongly encouraged to
purchase a handheld version of this calculator to use with this study
guide. You can buy this calculator at stores that carry office and school
supplies and through online vendors. Specific lessons in the Mathematical
Reasoning section of this book will help you learn to use this calculator.

CREATE AN ACCOUNT WITH THE TESTING
SERVICE®
Once you set it up, your account at https://ged.com will be your entry point
to all test activities, including taking a pretest, scheduling testing and
retesting (if necessary), viewing score reports, ordering transcripts and your
diploma, and investigating your next steps in making the transition to college
or to a career.

TAKE THE TEST: UNDERSTAND YOUR SCORE
According to the information available from the test-maker, the following is
known about scoring of the GED® Test:
Scoring is based on the number of points a test-taker earns in each
section rather than on the number of questions the test-taker gets
correct. Different questions have different point values. For example,
questions in which a test-taker is asked to fill in two blanks or choose
options from two drop-down menus are worth two points.
Point values do not correspond to Depth of Knowledge levels.
The number of questions a test-taker will see on test day may vary from
one form of the test to another. What remains the same across different
test forms is the number of points on each test. The total number of

points available on each test is as follows:
Reasoning through Language Arts: 65 raw points
Mathematical Reasoning: 49 raw points
Social Studies: 44 raw points
Science: 40 raw points
The number of points a test-taker earns is translated into a scaled score,
on a scale of 100 to 200 for each subject test:
100–144: below passing
145–164: passing / high school equivalency
165–174: GED® College Ready
175–200: GED® College Ready + Credit
For more detail on passing score standards, visit
https://ged.com/about_test/scores/.
Test-takers must earn a minimum of 145 on each subject test in order to
pass overall. It is no longer the case that a high score on one test can
compensate for a below-passing score on another test. If a test-taker
scores below 145 on any of the subject tests, the test-taker must retake
those subject tests regardless of her performance on other subject tests.
It’s important to note that passing scores can vary by state, so be sure to
check into the rules set by your state’s department of education.
We encourage test-takers to take the GED Ready™ Official Practice
Tests as a final step before scheduling their actual GED® Test. The
GED Ready™ Official Practice Tests are available from the MyGED™
portal. Register at https://ged.com.

For each subject test from Kaplan’s book or
website:
If you got
this
percentage
of
questions
correct . . .

then we
predict
that you
are . . .

Kaplan recommends . . .

0% to 50%

unlikely to
pass that
subject test
on Test
Day.

an in-depth review of the subject matter. Be sure
to look for commonalities among the questions
you got wrong, and study those topics in greater
depth. Review the questions you got wrong on
the practice tests until you understand how to
avoid similar mistakes in the future.

50% to
65%

somewhat
unlikely to
pass that
subject on
Test Day,
but this is
still
uncertain.

setting a goal by which you would like to
complete a final review of the material. As you
do that review, focus on the material you have
struggled with the most. Review the questions
you got wrong on the practice tests until you
understand how to avoid similar mistakes in the
future.

65% to
75%

moderately
likely to
pass that
subject on
Test Day.

considering scheduling a date to take that subject
test. You may want to give yourself a few more
days or weeks to do a final comprehensive
review of this subject before testing. If you must
take all the GED® subject tests at the same time,
be sure to review this material once per week as
you prepare for the other subject tests.

75% or
higher

highly
likely to

considering scheduling this subject test for the
near future. If you do, be sure to do a

pass on
Test Day.

comprehensive, high-level review of the material
and a final brush-up of any concepts you’ve
struggled with before Test Day. Also, get
yourself ready to test by getting on a regular
sleep schedule, keeping yourself healthy, and
managing stress. If you must wait before taking
the official GED® Test for this subject, review
the material once per week until Test Day so that
your skills do not rust.

GED® COMPUTER-BASED TESTING
The GED® Test is delivered on a computer. That means that you will need to
familiarize yourself with basic computer skills and computer-based question
formats in order to succeed on the test.
Before you take the actual test, you can practice computer-based testing
functions with the Practice Test available in Kaplan’s Online Center and with
the GED® Testing Service’s GED Ready™ Test.
The GED® Test is normally offered at official Pearson VUE Testing Centers.
As of May 2020, online testing is available in many U.S. states. You will
need need to score “green” on the GED Ready™ practice test within 60 days
of taking the online version of the GED® Test. Visit https://ged.com/takethe-ged-test-online for more details.

COMPUTER-BASED TESTING FUNCTIONS AND
TOOLS
The GED® Test uses many computer functions, some of which you may
already know. It also offers specific tools that you will utilize in different test
areas.

See how much time you have left: Time Remaining shows how much
time is left to complete each test.
Monitor your progress through each test by viewing the Question
Line. You can check how far you have progressed and how many more
questions you need to answer. Budget your time carefully to allow for
these writing tasks:
45 minutes for the Extended Response at the end of the first
section of the Reasoning through Language Arts Test
10 minutes for each of the Short Answer questions that may be
interspersed with other questions in the Science Test
Click on the Flag for Review if you are unsure of an answer. (You
should never leave a question unanswered.) If you click on it, the flag
will display in yellow and will be marked on the Review Screen.
At the end of each test, if you have time left, you can use the Review Screen
to go back and review questions that you marked.

KAPLAN GED® TEST STUDY
PLANNERS
Take the Pretests, starting on page 1. Check your answers in the Pretest
Answer Key starting on page 632. Use the results to fill in the charts below
so that you can target the areas that need the most work.

REASONING THROUGH LANGUAGE ARTS
Part I: Reading, 20 questions
Circle the Question Numbers that you answered correctly in the second
column. Write the Number Correct in the third column. Compare your
“number correct” to the “mastery” number in the fourth column. If you do
not have time to review all of the Reading sections, target your study to the
Content Areas in which you did not score at the mastery level.

Content Area

Question
Numbers

Number
Correct

Mastery/Total

Interpreting Nonfiction and
Informational Text
Pages 60–83

1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, 12, 13

7 out of 9

Analyzing Nonfiction and
Informational Text
Pages 84–99

8, 9, 10, 11,
14, 15

4 out of 6

Interpreting Fiction
Pages 100–115

16, 17, 18,
19, 20

3 out of 5

Part II: Writing and Language Skills, 18 questions

Circle the Question Numbers that you answered correctly in the second
column. Write the Number Correct in the third column. Compare your
“number correct” to the “mastery” number in the fourth column. If you do
not have time to review all of the Writing and Language sections, target your
study to the Content Areas in which you did not score at the mastery level.

Content Area

Question
Numbers

Number
Correct

Mastery/Total

2, 6, 9, 10,
12, 17

4 out of 6

Polishing Your Writing
Pages 172–181

4, 16

1 out of 2

Using Grammar Correctly
Pages 182–197

1, 3, 8, 14,
15, 18

4 out of 6

Using Writing Mechanics
Pages 198–211

5, 7, 11, 13

3 out of 4

Writing Effective Sentences
and Connecting Ideas
Pages 116–133 and 134–145

Part III: Extended Response
Circle the Question Numbers that you answered correctly in the second
column. Write the Number Correct in the third column. Compare your
“number correct” to the “mastery” number in the fourth column and target
your study to the Content Areas in which you did not score at the mastery
level.

Content Area

Question
Numbers

Number
Correct

Mastery/Total

Unpack the Writing
Prompt
Pages 146–147

1, 2, 3, 4

3 out of 4

Identify a Writer’s
Arguments and

5, 6, 7

2 out of 3

Assumptions, Develop a
Thesis Statement, and
Collect Supporting
Evidence
Pages 148–153
Plan Your Response
Pages 154–157

8

My score is
______ based
on the Planning
Checklist, page
634.

2 out of 3

Draft Your Response
Pages 158–163

9

My score is
_______ based
on the Drafting
Checklist, page
635.

4 out of 5

Revise and Edit Your
Response
Pages 164–167

10

My score is
_______ based
on the Revising
and Editing
Checklist, page
635.

4 out of 6

MATHEMATICAL REASONING
Part I: Quantitative Reasoning, 18 Questions
Circle the Question Numbers that you answered correctly in the second
column. Write the Number Correct in the third column. Compare your
“number correct” to the “mastery” number in the fourth column. If you do
not have time to review all of the Quantitative Reasoning sections, target
your study to the Content Areas in which you did not score at the mastery
level.
Question

Number

Content Area

Numbers

Correct

Mastery/Total

Number Sense and
Problem Solving
Pages 218–237

6, 8, 9, 13

3 out of 4

Decimals and Fractions
Pages 238–259

3, 7, 14, 15

3 out of 4

Ratio, Proportion, and
Percent
Pages 260–279

2, 5, 11, 17

3 out of 4

Data, Statistics, and
Probability
Pages 280–314

1, 4, 10, 12,
16, 18

4 out of 6

Part II: Algebraic Reasoning and Geometry, 22 Questions
Circle the Question Numbers that you answered correctly in the second
column. Write the Number Correct in the third column. Compare your
“number correct” to the “mastery” number in the fourth column. If you do
not have time to review all of the Algebraic Reasoning and Geometry
sections, target your study to the Content Areas in which you did not score at
the mastery level.

Content Area

Question
Numbers

Number
Correct

Mastery/Total

Algebra Basics,
Expressions, and
Polynomials
Pages 316–351

1, 2, 3, 8, 10,
13

5 out of 6

Equations, Inequalities,
and Functions
Pages 352–387

6, 9, 11, 12, 15,
17, 19, 22

6 out of 8

Geometry
Pages 388–412

4, 5, 7, 14, 16,
18, 20, 21

6 out of 8

SOCIAL STUDIES
Part I: Social Studies Practices, 10 Questions
Circle the Question Numbers that you answered correctly in the second
column. Write the Number Correct in the third column. Compare your
“number correct” to the “mastery” number in the fourth column. If you do
not have time to review all of the Social Studies Practices sections, target
your study to the Content Areas in which you did not score at the mastery
level.

Content Area

Question Number
Numbers Correct Mastery/Total

Determine Central Idea and
Draw Conclusions, Interpret
Words and Ideas, and Analyze
Relationships Between Materials
Pages 420–423 and 428–431

1, 2

2 out of 2

Analyze Author’s Purpose and
Point of View and Evaluate
Author’s Reasoning and
Evidence
Pages 424–427

3, 4, 5, 6

3 out of 4

Interpret Data and Statistics
Pages 432–433

7, 8, 9,
10

3 out of 4

Part II: Social Studies Content, 25 Questions
Circle the Question Numbers that you answered correctly in the second
column. Write the Number Correct in the third column. Compare your
“number correct” to the “mastery” number in the fourth column. If you do
not have time to review all of the Social Studies Content sections, target your
study to the Content Areas that need the most work.

Number
Correct

Content Area

Question Numbers

Mastery/Total

U.S. History
Pages 438–451

1, 2, 10, 16, 17, 18,
19

5 out of 7

Civics and
Government
Pages 452–465

4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 20,
21, 22, 23

7 out of 10

Economics
Pages 466–477

3, 11, 12, 24

3 out of 4

Geography and the
World
Pages 478–493

13, 14, 15, 25

3 out of 4

SCIENCE
Part I: Science Practices, 10 Questions
Circle the Question Numbers that you answered correctly in the second
column. Write the Number Correct in the third column. Compare your
“number correct” to the “mastery” number in the fourth column. If you do
not have time to review all of the Science Practices sections, target your
study to the Content Areas in which you did not score at the mastery level.

Content Area

Question
Numbers

Number
Correct

Mastery/Total

Comprehend Scientific
Presentations
Pages 500–501

1, 2

1 out of 2

Use the Scientific Method
Pages 502–505

3, 4

2 out of 2

Reason with, Express, and
Apply Scientific Information

5, 6, 7, 8

3 out of 4

Pages 506–509
Use Statistics and Probability
Pages 510–511

9, 10

2 out of 2

Part II: Science Content, 28 Questions
Circle the Question Numbers that you answered correctly in the second
column. Write the Number Correct in the third column. Compare your
“number correct” to the “mastery” number in the fourth column. If you do
not have time to review all of the Science Content sections, target your study
to the Content Areas in which you did not score at the mastery level.
Number
Correct

Content Area

Question Numbers

Mastery/Total

Life Science
Pages 518–537

1, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10, 16, 22,
24, 25, 27, 28

8 out of 12

Earth and
Space Science
Pages 538–551

2, 8, 12, 13, 14, 15, 26

5 out of 7

Physical Science
Pages 552–567

3, 7, 11, 17, 18, 19, 20,
21, 23

7 out of 9

GED® PRETESTS
The purpose of these Pretests is to help you decide what you need to study to
pass the actual GED® Test. You will use the Pretests along with their answers
and the study planners on pages xviii through xxii to determine what course
of study works best for you.
These Pretests are specially designed to make your study as efficient as
possible. If you want to see what the actual GED® Tests look like, look at the
Practice Tests beginning on page 569.
1. Take the following pretests that correspond to the four GED® Test areas.
Reasoning through Language Arts, pages 2–17
Part I: Reading—20 Questions
Part II: Writing and Language Skills—18 Questions
Part III: Extended Response
Mathematical Reasoning, pages 18–27
Part I: Quantitative Reasoning—18 Questions
Part II: Algebraic Reasoning and Geometry—22 Questions
Social Studies, pages 28–39
Part I: Social Studies Practices—10 Questions
Part II: Social Studies Content—25 Questions
Science, pages 40–52
Part I: Science Practices—10 Questions
Part II: Science Content—28 Questions
Most of the questions are in multiple-choice format; some require
writing a short answer or a longer, extended response.
For the multiple-choice questions, you may fill in the circles next to
the correct answers in this book, or you can write your answers on a
separate piece of paper.
You can write short answers on the Science Test and the extended

responses on the Reasoning through Language Arts Test on a computer
or, if one is not available, on a sheet of paper.
NOTE: Writing your responses on a computer is preferable because
you will be composing your responses on a computer when you take the
GED® Test. However, if you do not have a computer available when
you take these pretests, write your responses on paper so that you can
evaluate your writing samples.
2. Check your answers with the Pretest Answers and Explanations that begin
on page 632.
3. Fill in the Kaplan GED® Test Study Planners, starting on page xviii.
These charts will allow you to target your problem areas so that you can
study in the most efficient manner.
4. Use the study planners on pages xviii through xxii to map out your work.
Work your way through the book, chapter by chapter. Always review your
work using the explanations in the back of the book. Once you have
completed your study, take the Practice Tests on pages 569–629.

Reasoning through Language Arts Pretest
Part I: Reading—20 Questions
Directions: You may fill in the circles next to the correct answers or write
your answers on a separate piece of paper.
Questions 1 through 5 refer to the following passage about introverts.
Excerpted from “Don’t Call Introverted Children ‘Shy’”
1

Imagine a 2-year-old who greets you
with a huge smile, offering a toy. Now here’s
another child who regards you gravely and
hides behind his parent’s leg. How do you
feel about these two children? If you’re
like most people, you think of the first
child as social and the second as reserved
or . . . “shy.” . . . But this misses what’s
really going on with standoffish kids. Many
were born with a careful, sensitive temperament
that predisposes them to look before
they leap. And this can pay off handsomely
as they grow, in the form of strong academics,
enhanced creativity, and even a unique
brand of leadership and empathy.
2 One way to see this temperament more
clearly is to consider how these children
react to stimuli. When these children are at
4 months, if you pop a balloon over their
heads, they holler and pump their arms more

than other babies do. At age 2, they proceed
carefully when they see a . . . toy robot for
the first time. When they’re school age, they
play matching games with more deliberation
than their peers. . . . Notice that none of
these things—popping balloons, toy robots,
matching games—has anything to do with
people. In other words, these kids are not
antisocial. They’re simply sensitive to their
environments.
3 But if they’re not antisocial, these kids
are differently social. [Children with this type
of temperament are highly likely to grow up
to be introverted, but s]hyness and introversion
are not the same thing. Shy people fear
negative judgment, while introverts simply
prefer less stimulation. . . .
4 Children with an alert, sensitive temperament
also pay close attention to social
cues and moral principles. By age 6, they
cheat and break rules less than other kids
do—even when they believe they won’t be
caught. At 7, they’re more likely than their
peers to be described by parents and caregivers
as empathetic or conscientious. As
adults, introverted leaders have even been
found to deliver better outcomes than extroverts
when managing employees, according
to a recent study by management professor
Adam Grant of the Wharton School of the
University of Pennsylvania, because they
encourage others’ ideas instead of trying to

put their own stamp on things. And they’re
less likely to take dangerous risks. . . .
5 But we wouldn’t want to live in a world
composed entirely of cautious introverts. . . .
The two types [introverts and extroverts]
need each other. Many successful ventures
are the result of effective partnerships
between introverts and extroverts. The
famously charismatic Steve Jobs teamed
up with powerhouse introverts at crucial
points in his career at Apple, cofounding the
company with the shy Steve Wozniak and
bequeathing it to its current CEO, the quiet
Tim Cook ...
6 The ideal scenario is when those two
toddlers—the one who hands you the toy
with the smile and the other who checks you
out so carefully—grow up to run the world
together.
Reprinted with permission. Susan Cain, Time, January 26, 2012.

1. Which one of the following best expresses the main idea of the passage?
A. Companies should include both introverted and extroverted workers
on teams.
B. There are advantages to being sensitive and introverted.
C. Children who are sensitive are more deliberate when playing a game.
D. Introverts simply prefer less stimulation than others do.
2. According to the passage, children with sensitive temperaments are more
likely to be which of the following?
A. empathetic
B. risk-taking

C. antisocial
D. noisy
3. According to the passage, the partnership between Steve Jobs and Steve
Wozniak is an example of which of the following?
A. the negative consequences of a mixture of different personality types
in the workplace
B. a successful collaboration between two introverts
C. a successful collaboration between an introvert and an extrovert
D. a combination of people who should
“run the world”
4. Which one of the following is the best summary of the second paragraph?
A. Some children respond more dramatically than others to unfamiliar
or startling events.
B. Observing how children respond to stimuli is the best way to study
differ-ent kinds of social behavior.
C. Children who are perceived as “shy” are actually more sensitive than
other children to stimuli in their environ-ments.
D. If sensitivity in a child is not corrected by around age 2, that child
will grow up to be an oversensitive adult.
5. Based on the passage, which one of the following activities would an
introvert most likely prefer?
A. enjoying a quiet dinner with a handful of friends
B. going alone to a club to enjoy loud dance music
C. accompanying one friend to a crowded street festival
D. participating solo in a sport called
“extreme ice-slope surfing”
Questions 6 through 10 refer to the following
information about forklifts and the related
diagram.

Excerpted from “Forklift Safety Guide”
1

Driving a forklift differs from driving a
car. In a car or truck, the front wheels steer
the vehicle. A forklift has the steering wheels
in the rear. The rear end of the forklift swings
in a circle around the front wheels, which
support most of the load. The operator must
check that there is room for the rear end to
swing when making turns. This clearance
can be maintained in your workplace by permanently
marking aisles with painted lines
or arranging storage racks in a way that creates
obvious aisles for travel. However, these
marked aisles will only be effective if you
keep them clear of stored materials.
2 A forklift is not as responsive as a car
when the steering wheel is turned. Rearwheel
steering makes it difficult to stop a
forklift quickly or swerve and still maintain
control. It is important, then, not to drive a
forklift fast or around corners quickly.
3 Driving with the load downhill can result
in loss of the load and control of the forklift.
If you drive a forklift on an incline, you must
keep the load on the uphill side. Otherwise,
you may have no weight on the wheels that
steer, and you can lose control! The load
could also fall off or cause the forklift to tip.
4 Often a large forklift load obstructs the
driver’s view in one direction. It may be necessary
to travel long distances with the load

to the rear (in reverse for most forklifts). Use
extra caution when traveling in reverse.

Adapted with permission from the State of Washington, Department of Labor and Industries

6. According to the passage, which one of the following is an effect of rearwheel steering on a forklift?
A. The front wheels carry most of the load.
B. The driver may have some difficulty in controlling the forklift.
C. There is a danger that the forklift will tip over.
D. The forklift driver may have little visibility.
7. Which one of the following identifies a pair of things or ideas between
which the author draws a contrast?
A. driving a forklift and driving a car
B. the turning radius of a forklift and the turning radius of a car
C. a warehouse with clearly marked aisles and a highway with clearly
marked lanes
D. driving a forklift in reverse and walking backward
8. Together, the passage and the graphic support which one of the following
conclusions?
A. A forklift should never carry a load taller than the forklift itself.

B. A forklift should travel backward only when traveling downhill.
C. A forklift cannot drive uphill unless it is carrying a load.
D. A forklift that is traveling downhill with a heavy load should travel
backward.
9. Which of the following best describes the author’s purpose?
A. to inform drivers of cars about the differences between driving a car
and driving a forklift
B. to warn the general public about the dangers of forklifts
C. to explain safe practices to forklift drivers
D. to describe the difference between skilled and unskilled forklift
drivers
10. Which of the following best describes the organization of the passage?
A. The author lists potential dangers inherent in forklift driving and
explains how to avoid them.
B. The author states that forklift driving is dangerous and gives
examples of forklift accidents to support that idea.
C. The author lists the features of forklifts and describes their benefits.
D. The author explains the pros and cons
of forklift driving to present a balanced picture of the value of forklifts.
Questions 11 through 15 refer to the following selections about genetically
modified organism
(GMO) foods.
World Food Prize Goes to Three Biotech Scientists
1

The World Food Prize Foundation took
the bold step of awarding this year’s prize to
three pioneers of plant biotechnology whose
work brought the world genetically modified
crops.
2 Van Montagu and Chilton independently

developed the technology in the 1980s to
stably transfer foreign genes into plants, a
discovery that set up a race to develop tools
to genetically engineer plants. It allowed
other scientists to incorporate genetic traits
that allow plants to better withstand drought
and extreme heat and to fight off pests and
disease. Fraley was the first to successfully
transfer immunity to specific bacteria into a
plant. Fraley genetically engineered the first
herbicide-resistant soybean in 1996.
3 Genetically enhanced crops are grown
on more than 420 million acres in nearly
30 countries by over 17 million farmers
worldwide, the foundation said. More than
90 percent of the users are small, resourcepoor
farmers in developing countries.
4 Many U.S. farmers credited genetic
modifications in corn with saving last year’s
crop from all but total devastation, as half of
the nation endured the worst drought in 60
years. Modern corn plants are more stable
and can withstand a wider variety of climate
conditions because of genetically improved
leaves, roots, and reproductive capability.
5 Fraley said biotechnology will enable
the farming industry to meet the needs of
a growing global population. “We know we
need from a demand perspective to double
food production around the world in the next
30 years,” he said.

Adapted from David Pitt, “World Food Prize goes to 3 biotech scientists,” Associated Press, June 19,
2013

Dangers of GMO Foods
1

The rise in autoimmune diseases,
infertility, gastrointestinal problems, and
chronic diseases may be associated with
the introduction of GMO (genetically modified
organism) foods. In a position paper by
the American Academy of Environmental
Medicine, the authors ask all physicians
to consider the role of GMO foods in the
nation’s health crisis and advise their
patients to avoid all GMO foods whenever
possible. The Academy also recommends
a moratorium on GMO seeds and calls for
immediate independent safety testing and
the labeling of all food items containing
genetically modified products.
2 As the reliance on GMO seeds expands
worldwide, concerns about food supply and
safety continue to escalate. Genetically engineered
seeds are identical in structure, and
if a problem affects one particular crop, a
major crop failure can result. For example,
following the recent failure of three GMO
corn crops in three South African provinces,
the Africa Centre for Biosecurity has called
for an investigation and immediate ban of all
GMO food. Corn is a primary source of food
for southern African nations.
3 Most GMO seeds are genetically

engineered to be herbicide tolerant and
resistant to insect infestation and disease.
Environmentalists worry that the characteristics
of GMO crops may encourage farmers
to increase their use of herbicides and pesticides,
which will raise human consumption of
dangerous toxins. GMO crops also manufacture
their own pesticides, which puts further
poisons into humans and soil and may cause
unforeseen changes in the environment.
Adapted from Susan Brassard, “Dangers of GMO Foods,” Livestrong.com, September 2, 2010

11. The author of Passage 1 most likely notes that the majority of GMO
crops are cultivated by “small, resource-poor farmers in developing
countries” in order to
A. highlight how GMO foods can be harmful to struggling farmers
B. suggest that GMO foods can be beneficial to struggling farmers
C. illustrate how GMO foods can be more expensive for consumers
D. explain why GMO crops often fail
12. Passage 2 is primarily concerned with
A. the uses and misuses of GMO foods
B. the origin and development of GMO foods
C. the unexpected benefits of GMO foods
D. the safety and reliability of GMO foods
13. What can be inferred from the first paragraph of Passage 2?
A. American physicians, as a group, are completely unaware of the
potential dangers of GMOs.
B. The labels of some foods containing GMO ingredients do not
indicate that the products contain genetically modified components.
C. GMO foods have been proven to cause certain chronic conditions.

D. Independent safety testing has been completed for most GMO foods.
14. The two passages primarily disagree about whether or not
A. GMO foods can help support a growing world population
B. GMO foods are better able to withstand drought and insect
infestation than
natural foods
C. GMO foods are largely a positive development for global food
production
D. scientists who study GMO foods are worthy of recognition
15. Passage 2 cites the example of a major crop failure in South Africa to
illustrate the dangers of planting with GMO seeds. Which paragraph in
Passage 1 offers a counterexample that weakens this position?
A. paragraph 1
B. paragraph 2
C. paragraph 4
D. paragraph 5
Questions 16 through 20 refer to the following.
Excerpted from Black Beauty
1

The first place that I can well remember
was a large, pleasant meadow with a pond
of clear water in it. Some shady trees leaned
over it, and rushes and water lilies grew at
the deep end. Over the hedge on one side
we looked into a plowed field, and on the
other we looked over a gate at our master’s
house, which stood by the roadside. . . .
2 One day, when there was a good deal
of kicking, my mother whinnied to me to

come to her, and then she said:
3 “I wish you to pay attention to what I
am going to say to you. The colts who live
here are very good colts, but they are carthorse
colts, and of course they have not
learned manners. You have been well-bred
and well-born; your father has a great name
in these parts, and your grandfather won the
cup two years at the Newmarket races; your
grandmother had the sweetest temper of any
horse I ever knew, and I think you have never
seen me kick or bite. I hope you will grow up
gentle and good, and never learn bad ways;
do your work with a good will, lift your feet
up well when you trot, and never bite or kick
even in play.“
4 I have never forgotten my mother’s
advice; I knew she was a wise old horse, and
our master thought a great deal of her. Her
name was Duchess, but he often called her
Pet.
5 Our master was a good, kind man. He
gave us good food, good lodging, and kind
words; he spoke as kindly to us as he did to
his little children. We were all fond of him,
and my mother loved him very much. When
she saw him at the gate she would neigh
with joy, and trot up to him. . . . All the horses
would come to him, but I think we were
his favorites. My mother always took him to
the town on a market day in a light gig.
6 There was a plowboy, Dick, who sometimes

came into our field to pluck blackberries
from the hedge. When he had eaten all
he wanted, he would have what he called fun
with the colts, throwing stones and sticks at
them to make them gallop. We did not much
mind him, for we could gallop off, but sometimes
a stone would hit and hurt us.
7 One day he was at this game, and did
not know that the master was in the next
field, but he was there, watching what was
going on; over the hedge he jumped in a
snap, and catching Dick by the arm, he gave
him such a box on the ear as made him roar
with the pain and surprise. As soon as we
saw the master, we trotted up nearer to see
what went on.
From Black Beauty, by Anna Sewell. Used by permission of Random House, Inc.

16. Who is the narrator in this passage?
A. a servant
B. a hired plowboy
C. a young horse
D. a child
17. What is the setting of the story?
A. a town
B. a racetrack
C. a forest
D. a farm
18. The narrator’s account of his youth can best be described as

A. melancholy
B. contented
C. regretful
D. humorous
19. The narrator would most likely describe the master in the story as
A. affectionate and protective
B. arrogant and abusive
C. playful and light-hearted
D. bold and aggressive
20. The mother’s speech in paragraph 3 most likely serves to
A. correct the narrator for playing too roughly
B. assure the narrator he will grow up to win races like his grandfather
C. reprimand the narrator for insulting the master
D. accuse the narrator of stealing blackberries
Answers and explanations for Reasoning through Language Arts, Part I
start on page 632.

Reasoning through Language Arts Pretest
Part II: Writing and Language Skills—18
Questions
Directions: You may fill in the circles next to the correct answers or write
your answers on a separate piece of paper. Some of the questions in this
section mimic the GED test’s drop-down menu question format. Wherever
the word “Select” appears, choose the option that best completes the passage.
Questions 1 through 6 refer to the following paragraphs.
To: Parents and Guardians
From: Sonia Vasquez, School Nurse
(1) A student in
diagnosed with strep throat. (2) Strep throat is
a highly contagious disease and a common illness in children. (3) Unlike
most sore throats, which are caused by viruses, strep throat is caused by
bacteria and is treatable with antibiotics. (4) The time between exposure to
the disease and the appearance of symptoms is usually one to three days. (5)
To safeguard your child’s health, please take the following precautions. (6)
Watch your child for strep
sore throat, fever, swollen glands,
and headache. (7) If your child
. (8) If a throat culture is positive,
treatment can be started. (9) It is extremely important to take all the
prescribed medicine until it is gone.
(10) Children should get immediate treatment for several reasons. (11) For
one, treatment reduces spread of the disease. (12)
prevent
rheumatic fever. (13) Treatment also prevents other rare but possibly
dangerous complications.
(14)
medicine for 24 hours, he or she may return to school.
(15) Please call us with any questions or concerns you have.
1. A student in

diagnosed with strep throat.

A. you’re child’s class has been
B. your child’s class have been
C. your children’s class has been,
D. your child’s class has been
2. Watch your child for strep
and headache.

sore throat, fever, swollen glands,

A. symptoms. Such as
B. symptoms, the best known are
C. symptoms, such as
D. symptoms examples are
3. If your child

.

A. will develop any of these symptoms, take them to the doctor
B. develops any of these symptoms, take him or her to the doctor
C. will develop any of these symptoms, take him or her to the doctor
D. developed any of these symptoms, take them to the doctor
4. Which revision would improve the effectiveness of the passage?
Begin a new paragraph with
A. sentence 3
B. sentence 4
C. sentence 5
D. sentence 6
5.

prevent rheumatic fever.
A. In addition, antibiotics may
B. In addition antibiotics may
C. Additionally antibiotics, may
D. When taking antibiotics, may

6.

medicine for 24 hours, he or she may return to school.
A. After the fever is gone and your child has taken
B. Your child must have no fever and having taken
C. Your child, once having no fever and having taken
D. The fever must be gone and once your child is taking

Questions 7 through 12 refer to the following paragraphs.
Compulsive Gambling
(A)
Most of us can
with little damage to our finances. In contrast,
compulsive gamblers cannot stop even when their behavior
to
ruin their lives.
(B)
Gambling frequently occupies the thoughts of compulsive gamblers. For
instance, they may be reliving past gambling experiences or coming up with
schemes to get more money for gambling. Although they may have tried
several times to stop gambling, their efforts met with failure. When trying to
stop gambling, they feel irritable and restless. They need to gamble with
more and more money in order to enjoy
money increases their
desire to gamble. They may even
to get the funds to continue
their habit. Many of them have lost jobs, important relationships, or career
opportunities because of their involvement with gambling.
(C)
Compulsive gambling is like any other addiction. As gamblers lose control
over gambling, they lose control over their lives as well. They may become
anxious and
may fail to live up to their obligations, causing
others to stop trusting them.
7. Most of us can

with little damage to our finances.

A. bet on a football game, or buy a lottery ticket
B. make bets on football games, or lottery tickets
C. bet on a football game or buy a lottery ticket
D. place bets on football games, or on lottery tickets
8. In contrast, compulsive gamblers cannot stop even when their behavior
to ruin their lives.
A. had threatened
B. will threaten
C. threatens
D. having threatened
9. Which sentence would be most effective if inserted at the beginning of
paragraph B?
A. Compulsive gamblers have a lot
of problems.
B. Some people engage in compulsive
gambling.
C. Gamblers escape from negative
emotions.
D. Compulsive gamblers display a number of consistent traits.
10. They need to gamble with more and more money in order to enjoy
money increases their desire to gamble.
A. it. Losing
B. it but losing
C. it, losing
D. it and losing
11. They may even
continue their habit.

to get the funds to

A. commit fraud, forgery, or theft

B. commit fraud forgery or theft,
C. commit fraud or forgery or theft
D. commit fraud forgery or theft,
12. They may become anxious and
may fail to live up to their
obligations, causing others to stop trusting them.
A. depressed, or they
B. depressed, they
C. depressed. And they
D. depressed and they
Questions 13 through 18 refer to the following paragraphs.
Choosing a Pet
(A)
(1)
just because they see an adorable puppy or kitten. (2)
Unhappily, these poor creatures are likely to end up at animal shelters
. (3) To avoid this outcome, choose your pet wisely. (4)
Remember that your pet will become a member of your family and a daily
responsibility.
(B)
(5)
when selecting a pet. (6) First of all, do you have the time
to care for a pet? (7) While some pets require little care, puppies and kittens
need to
. (8) If the animal needs exercise, is your home large
enough? (9) Would you enjoy taking your pet outdoors for exercise? (10) Do
you think people should get a lot of exercise? (11) Can you afford the costs of
food, vaccinations, and health checkups? (12) Does your building allow pets?
(13) Finally, if you must leave home for a few days, can you find someone to
care for your pet?
(C)

(14) Once you choose a pet that is appropriate for your lifestyle, bring the
animal
to a veterinarian for examination. (15) You should be able to return the pet
.
13.

just because they see an adorable puppy or kitten.
A. Being impulsive, people often make buys at Pet Stores
B. People often make impulse buys at pet stores
C. Often, people buy on impulse at Pet Stores
D. It often happens that people buy on impulse at pet stores

14. Unhappily, these poor creatures are likely to end up at animal shelters
.
A. when the owner find out he can’t care for the animals
B. the owners having discovered they can’t take care of the animals
C. their owners finding out that he can’t care for the animals
D. when the owners find they can’t care for the animals
15.

when selecting a pet.
A. There are several factors to consider
B. There is several factors to consider
C. There being several factors to consider
D. There are several factors considering

16. While some pets require little care, puppies and kittens need to
.
A. be housebroken and to train them
B. housebreaking and training
C. be housebroken and trained
D. be housebroken and training
17. Which revision should be made to the placement of sentence 10?

A. move sentence 10 to the beginning of
paragraph B
B. move sentence 10 to follow sentence 6
C. move sentence 10 to the beginning of
paragraph C
D. remove sentence 10
18. You should be able to return the pet

.

A. if the animal was unhealthy
B. if the animal were going to be unhealthy
C. if the animal will be unhealthy
D. if the animal is unhealthy
Answers and explanations for Reasoning through Language Arts, Part II
start on page 633.

Reasoning through Language Arts Pretest
Part III: Extended Response
Directions: Read both the selection and the writing prompt and answer the
questions that follow.
Questions 1–10 are based on the process of writing a response to a reading
selection.
NOTE: Do not start writing your response until you are asked to do so at
question 9.
Identity Theft
Identity theft happens when someone steals your personal information and
uses it without your permission. It’s a serious crime that can wreak havoc on
your finances, credit history, and reputation—and can take time, money, and
patience to resolve. If identity thieves have your personal information, they
can drain your bank account, run up charges on your credit cards, open new
utility accounts, or get medical treatment on your health insurance.
How do identity thieves get your personal financial information? They
might go through trash cans and dumpsters, stealing bills and documents that
have sensitive information. Or an identity thief might misuse the name of a
legitimate business and call or send emails that trick you into revealing
personal information. Finally, an identity thief might steal your wallet, purse,
backpack, or mail and remove your credit cards, driver’s license, passport,
health insurance card, and other items that contain personal information.
There are three important ways in which you can protect yourself from
identity thieves. First, keep your financial papers secure. Lock your financial
documents and records in a safe place at home, and lock your wallet or purse
in a safe place at work. When you go out, take only the identification and
credit and debit cards you need, and leave your Social Security card at home.
Shred receipts, credit offers, credit applications, insurance forms, physician
statements, checks, bank statements, expired charge cards, and similar
documents when you don’t need them any longer. Take outgoing mail to post

office collection boxes or the post office, and promptly remove mail that
arrives in your mailbox. If you won’t be home for several days, request a
vacation hold on your mail. When you order new checks, don’t have them
mailed to your home, unless you have a secure mailbox with a lock.
Second, make sure you know who is getting your personal or financial
information. Don’t give out personal information on the phone, through the
mail, or over the Internet unless you’ve initiated the contact or know who
you’re dealing with. If a company that claims to have an account with you
sends an email asking for personal information, don’t click on links in the
email. Instead, type the company name into your web browser, go to their
site, and contact them through customer service. Ask whether the company
really sent a request.
Finally, take steps to protect your online information as well. A “lock”
icon on the status bar of your Internet browser means your information will
be safe when it’s transmitted. Look for the lock before you send personal or
financial information online. Use strong passwords with your laptop, credit,
bank, and other accounts. Install anti-virus software, anti-spyware software,
and a firewall, and set your preference to update these protections often.
Don’t open files, click on links, or download programs sent by strangers.
Adapted from the Federal Trade Commission’s website: www.consumer.ftc.gov.

Writing Prompt
The passage above outlines specific ways in which identity thieves go
about stealing financial information from others. Read the passage
closely.
Write a response to this passage that analyzes the mistakes that can
make people vulnerable to identity theft. Use relevant and specific
information from the reading selection to support your response.

Unpack the Writing Prompt
1. What is the topic of the writing prompt?

_______________________________________
2. What does the prompt ask you to do?
_______________________________________
3. What does the prompt tell you that you need to include in the response?
_______________________________________
4. Are you being asked to give your opinion or to explain something?
_______________________________________
Develop Your Argument, Thesis Statement, and Evidence
5. What is the writer’s main point about the topic?
_______________________________________
6. What will be your main point in response to the writing prompt?
_______________________________________
7. What are three pieces of evidence from the text that you will use to support
your point?
_______________________________________
_______________________________________
_______________________________________
Plan, Draft, Revise, and Edit Your Response
8. On a piece of paper, make a plan for your response.
9. On a computer or on a piece of paper, write a response to the prompt that
includes an introduction, a body, and a conclusion.

10. On the computer or on the paper, make revisions to improve your
response and edit to correct errors in grammar, usage, spelling,
capitalization, and punctuation.
The Extended Response Evaluation Guide
for Reasoning through Language Arts, Part
III starts on page 634.

Mathematical Reasoning Pretest
Part I: Quantitative Reasoning—18
Questions
Directions: You may fill in the circles next to the correct answers or write
your answers on a separate piece of paper. You MAY use a calculator.
Questions 1 and 2 refer to the following information and graph.
Video Warehouse has divided the surrounding community into four
advertising zones. The graph shows the total number of customers from each
zone for a three-week period.

1. During the three weeks, how many customers came from Zones 3 and 4?
A. between 900 and 1,000
B. between 1,000 and 1,100

C. between 1,100 and 1,200
D. between 1,200 and 1,300
2. Approximately what is the ratio of customers from Zone 1 to customers
from Zone 3?
A. 3:5
B. 3:2
C. 2:1
D. 1:2
3. A potter uses

of a pound of clay to make a bowl. How many bowls

could the potter make from 10 pounds of clay?
A. 6
B. 8
C. 16
D. 17
4. Janelle has recently been hired for the job of library assistant. The
following graph shows what percent of her time will be spent on each of
five tasks each day.

The number of hours that Janelle will spend working at the counter is
approximately how many times the number of hours that she will spend
processing new books and repairing bindings?
A. 2
B. 3
C. 4
D. 6
5. Fifteen percent of the workers at Nationwide Industries earn minimum
wage. If 24 workers earn minimum wage, how many total workers are
there at Nationwide Industries?
A. 4
B. 36
C. 160
D. 360
6. An accountant is going to pay the following four bills:
Bill Amount

W

$27.10

X

$261.00

Y

$2.80

Z

$27.20

The accountant will pay the bills in order from smallest to largest. In what
order will he pay them?
A. W, X, Z, Y
B. X, W, Z, Y
C. Y, X, W, Z
D. Y, W, Z, X
7. A jar holds 16 ounces of honey. A cook is going to make two recipes. One
of the recipes calls for 2.5 ounces of honey, and the other calls for 4.25
ounces of honey. After the cook has made those two recipes, how many
ounces of honey will be left in the jar?

A. 6.75
B. 9.25
C. 10.00
D. 11.75

8. All numbers that are evenly divisible by both 6 and 14 are also divisible by
which of the following numbers?
A. 8
B. 12
C. 21
D. 28
9. Alice, Kathy, and Sheila work as medical assistants at Valley Clinic. Alice
has worked 8 years longer than Kathy. Kathy has worked half as long as
Sheila. If Sheila has worked at the company for 10 years, how many years
has Alice worked there?
A. 5
B. 8
C. 10
D. 13
Question 10 is based on the spinner below.

10. The spinner shown in the drawing is divided into eight equal sections. If
you spin the spinner one time, what is the probability of NOT getting
blue?

A.
B.
C.

D.
11. A computer monitor is regularly priced at $320. During a two-day sale,
the price was decreased to $240. Which of the following is the percent
decrease of the monitor’s price during the sale?
A. 25%
B. 33%
C. 75%
D. 80%
12. For a 10-day period, a bank kept track of the number of new accounts
opened each day. The results are shown in the table below. What is the
median number of accounts opened per day during this 10-day period?
Day

Accounts

Day

Accounts

May 7

6

May 14

4

May 8

2

May 15

8

May 9

7

May 16

6

May 10

5

May 17

4

May 11

4

May 18

7

A. 5
B. 5.3

C. 5.5
D. 6
13. Jim is a salesperson, and his employers expect him to sell at least $12,000
in merchandise per month. In April, Jim sold $2,500 in the first week of
the month and twice that much in the second week. How much must he
sell in the rest of April combined in order to sell the minimum expected of
him?
A. $4,500
B. $5,500
C. $9,500
D. $12,000
14. Angela likes to use two walking sticks when she goes hiking, but the two
walking sticks she has been given recently are different lengths. One is
feet long, and the other is
feet long.

Angela wants to cut the longer stick to match the shorter one. How much
should she cut from the longer stick so that the two walking sticks will be
the same length?

A.
B.
C.
D.
Question 15 is based on the following number line.

15. Which of the following is the decimal point value of the dot on the line
above?
A. 3.25
B. 3.50
C. 3.75
D. 4.00
Question 16 is based on the following information and graph.
Marjorie has a class of 35 students, and she tracked their performance on a
recent math exam. The graph below represents how their scores were
distributed along the range of possible scores, from F to A.

16. Based on the graph, which of the following is a true statement?
A. None of Marjorie’s students received an F on the exam.
B. Most of Marjorie’s students received either an A or a B on the exam.
C. If Marjorie gave the same exam again to another group of students,
most of those students would receive a C.
D. More students received either an A or a B than received either a D or
an F.
17. Jason deposits $5,000 in a bank account that will pay him 4 percent
simple interest annually. If Jason deposits no more than the initial $5,000,
how much money will be in the account at the end of five years? (The
formula for simple interest is l = prt or interest = principal × rate × time.
Use a decimal to express the interest when using that formula.)
A. $200
B. $1,000
C. $5,000
D. $6,000
18. A local library shows movies on Thursday evenings. The library
administrator has chosen the next six movies he will show, but he
has not decided in which order to show them. How many possible
orderings of the six movies are there?

A. 21
B. 36
C. 720
D. 1,012
Answers and explanations for Mathematical Reasoning, Part I start on
page 636.

Mathematical Reasoning Pretest
Below is a formula sheet that appears on the actual GED® Test. You can refer
to this page on Part II of this Pretest.

Part II: Algebraic Reasoning and Geometry—22
Questions
Directions: You may fill in the circles next to the correct answers or write
your answers on a separate piece of paper. Refer to the formula sheet on page
22 as needed. You MAY use your calculator.
1. Which point on the number line below represents the value

A. point A
B. point B
C. point C
D. point D
2. Evaluate the expression
and z = -1.

when

A. 45
B. 16
C. 4
D.
3. On April 1 of this year, the high temperature in Northville was 46 degrees
Fahrenheit. Then a sudden snowstorm arose, and the temperature dropped
sharply to a low of
degrees Fahrenheit. What was the magnitude of
the change in temperature on that day?
A. 54

B. 46
C. 36
D.
Question 4 refers to the following drawing.

4. A tower casts a shadow 11 feet long. The distance from the top of the
tower to the end of the shadow is 61 feet. How many feet tall is the tower?
(Note: figure not drawn to scale.)
A. 50
B. 60
C. 61
D. 72
Question 5 is based on the following information.
Designer Furnishings sells premade cabinets and cupboards, as shown below.

Model

Dimensions
(in inches)

411R

32 by 22 by 10

412R

28 by 36 by 15

413S

24 by 72 by 18

414S

25 by 24 by 6

5. Each face of cabinet 413S is in the shape of a rectangle. What is the
volume, in cubic feet, of Model 413S?
A. 18
B. 31
C. 36
D. 108
6. Together, Levy and Matthew earn $4,680 per month. Levy earns $520
more per month than Matthew earns. How much does Levy earn per
month?
A. $2,080
B. $2,340
C. $2,600
D. $4,160
7. The design for a new cone-shaped closed container is shown below. What
is the surface area of this container, in square inches? You can select the
correct formula from the formula sheet on page 22.

A. 4π
B. 12π
C. 16π
D. 28π
8. Simplify this polynomial:
A.
B.
C.
D.
9. A rectangle is drawn on a coordinate grid. Three of its four vertices are
located at points
and (2, − 2) What is the location
of the fourth vertex? Mark your answer on the coordinate grid below.

10. Which of the following expressions is equal to the expression

A.
B.
C.
D.
11. In the equation

which of the following values for x

will make the equation true?
A.
B.
C. 3
D. 4
12. An inequality is shown.
12(x − 2) < 24
Which of the following is the solution to the inequality?
A.
B.
C.
D.
13. Scientists estimate that Earth is 4,540,000,000 years old. What is that
number expressed in scientific notation?
A.

B.
C.
D.
14. Joe just purchased an oddly shaped piece of property, depicted in the
figure below.

What is the area, in square yards, of Joe’s new property?
A. 120
B. 134
C. 140
D. 204
15. The XYZ Company sells hats and will monogram them if customers
choose. The price for each monogram varies depending on how many hats
a customer would like to have monogrammed. The monogram prices for
several order sizes are shown below:
Number of hats to be monogrammed (n) Price per monogram (p)
1

$5

2

$4.50

3

$4.00

4

$3.50

5

$3.00

6 or more

$2.50

Which of the following best expresses the relationship of price per
monogram (for all nonnegative values of p) to number of hats
monogrammed shown in the table above?
A.
B.
C.
D.
16. A parallelogram has two obtuse angles and two acute angles. If the
measure of one of the obtuse angles is 110°, what is the measure, in
degrees, of one of the acute angles?
A. 10°
B. 70°
C. 110°
D. 240°
Question 17 refers to the following graph.

17. Line H is the graph of which of the following equations?
A.
B.
C.
D.
18. A fountain’s pool is enclosed by a circular plastic tank. The distance from
the center of the pool to the wall of the tank is 10 feet. How long is the
wall of the tank in feet?
A.
B.
C.
D.
19. Line W passes through the following points on the coordinate grid: (0, –
9) and (4, –1). What is the slope of line W?

A.
B.
C.
D. 2
20. Beansey’s Baked Beans, Inc., has developed a new can for its baked
beans, shown below:

What is the volume, in cubic centimeters, of the new can?
A.
B.
C.
D.
21. Tina is considering renting a commercial space for her business. The
space is shown below.

What is the area, in square feet, of the
commercial space?
A. 290
B. 2,100
C. 2,800
D. 4,100
22. In the system of equations
and
solve for
both x and y. You may use the coordinate grid below to help with your
work.

What is the solution set for x and y?
A.
B. (0, 3)
C. (0, 9)
D. (2, 5)
Answers and explanations for Mathematical Reasoning, Part II start on
page 636.

Social Studies Pretest
Part I: Social Studies Practices—10
Questions
Directions: You may fill in the circles next to the correct answers or write
your answers on a separate piece of paper. You MAY use your calculator if
desired.
Question 1 refers to the following passage.
With the passage of the Fifteenth Amendment in 1870, all African Americans
were given the right to vote throughout the United States. However, many
Southern states quickly enacted legislative barriers to disenfranchise these
new voters. Provisions such as poll taxes, literacy tests, and the grandfather
clause prevented many African Americans from exercising their rights. For
nearly one hundred years, these restrictions persisted in many Southern
states. The civil rights movement, which gained national momentum in the
1950s, sought to address this unequal treatment in voting rights laws. Finally,
in 1965, the Voting Rights Act provided for federal oversight of states that
had previously raised unfair barriers to African American voting and
outlawed discriminatory measures such as poll taxes and literacy tests. Voter
participation among African Americans dramatically increased in the
following years.
1. Which of the following describes the author’s main idea?
A. The Voting Rights Act of 1965 ended discrimination in all areas of
American society.
B. The main effect of the Voting Rights
Act of 1965 was to empower individual states to end discriminatory
measures against African American voting.
C. The Voting Rights Act of 1965 gave the federal government
oversight of state elections to end barriers against African American

voting.
D. The Fifteenth Amendment did not end racism in Southern states.
Question 2 refers to the following passage.
To address the nation’s financial insolvency after the Revolutionary War,
George Washington turned to his secretary of the treasury, Alexander
Hamilton. Hamilton proposed creating a national bank, which would help to
pay back the nation’s
debt and stabilize the nation’s currency. Immediately, Hamilton faced stiff
opposition
from those who believed in a strict construction of the Constitution; they
believed that Congress and the president could only exercise powers
specifically written in the Constitution. Because the Constitution did not give
the power to create a national bank, Hamilton’s actions would be
unconstitutional. In response, Hamilton offered a justification for the
constitutionality of his bank based on a loose construction of the
Constitution, meaning that Congress could use the Necessary and Proper
Clause of the Constitution to stretch its power beyond what was specified in
the words of the document. In Washington’s first great test of presidential
leadership, he sided with Hamilton and the idea of a national bank.
2. What is meant by the term “construction” in the passage?
A. building
B. creation
C. interpretation
D. structure
Questions 3 and 4 refer to the following passage.
In an attempt to make consumers more aware of the nutritional value of the
foods they purchase, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is attempting
to impose strict new regulations on all food retailers. These regulations would
require that the caloric information of each food product be clearly posted on
the premises, typically through signs that would be expensive to create and
maintain. While these regulations would place a financial burden on all food

retailers—an expense that would necessarily be passed on to consumers—the
regulations would be particularly devastating to smaller restaurants, grocery
stores, and convenience stores that offer fresh food items. To relieve this
burden on smaller businesses, Congress has proposed the Common Sense
Nutritional Disclosure Act, which would exempt smaller food establishments
that primarily sell prepackaged foods from having to post on-site information.
Also, under this legislation, restaurants that take most of their orders remotely
can post caloric information online.
3. What is the author’s point of view regarding the FDA’s new food
regulations?
A. The FDA’s new regulations would place a financial hardship on
small food retailers.
B. The FDA’s new regulations would help consumers choose foods of a
higher nutritional value.
C. The FDA’s new regulations would have a more severe financial
impact on chain restaurants than on smaller food retailers.
D. The FDA’s new regulations would give food retailers more diverse
options for displaying caloric information.
4. Which one of the following words points to the author’s viewpoint
regarding the FDA’s strict new regulations?
A. “aware”
B. “strict”
C. “devastating”
D. “remotely”
Questions 5 and 6 refer to the following paragraph.
It is known that a significant quantity of oil exists within the Arctic National
Wildlife Refuge (ANWR) of Alaska. Shockingly, there are many who would
have us ignore this incredible resource housed right within our national
borders. One commonly cited reason against drilling for oil in the ANWR is
that the drilling process would endanger the existence of the porcupine
caribou, whose calving grounds encompass much of the region. But science

has shown us that as many as 99 percent of all the species that once existed
on Earth are now extinct, and the vast majority of these extinctions were not
caused by humans. Clearly, then, extinctions are a sad but natural aspect of
life on Earth, and we have no reason not to drill in the ANWR.
5. Which of the following statements is a correct evaluation of the argument?
A. The argument is valid, because it relies on scientific evidence that
has been shown to be true.
B. The argument is valid, because extracting oil would bolster the
national economy.
C. The argument is invalid, because it confuses correlation with
causation.
D. The argument is invalid, because it attempts to refute one reason
against doing something while ignoring other possible reasons.
6. Which of the following considerations, if true, best illustrates why the
author’s evidence is inadequate?
A. Some people depend on the porcupine caribou for food.
B. People who call themselves “scientists” often make claims that are
very persuasive.
C. There is not enough oil in the ANWR to have a measurable impact
on global oil prices.
D. Extracting oil from the ANWR would
reduce the foreign trade deficit.
Questions 7 and 8 are based on the following information and map.
After World War II, Germany was split into two nations: democratic West
Germany and communist East Germany. West Germany was under the
control of the victorious Allies, who formed an alliance called the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). In 1955, NATO decided to allow
West Germany to join NATO and to rearm. In response, the U.S.S.R. (that is,
the Soviet Union) and a number of
communist Eastern European countries formed what they called a “Treaty of
Friendship, Co-operation, and Mutual Assistance,” commonly referred to as

the Warsaw Pact. In the Warsaw Pact, the communist countries agreed to
band together if one of them was attacked, and the smaller communist
countries agreed to put their military forces under the command of the Soviet
Union.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency

7. Some historians believe that, in forming the Warsaw Pact, the Soviet
Union wanted to create a buffer between itself and NATO countries. How
does the map support that view?
A. The map indicates that many of the World War II Allies joined the
Warsaw Pact, but not until the 1960s.
B. The map shows that most of the Warsaw Pact countries lay between
the Soviet Union and Western countries, including France, West

Germany, and Great Britain.
C. The map shows that the Warsaw Pact involved the building of a wall
between the Soviet Union and Western Europe.
D. The map indicates that the Soviet Union was made up of smaller
republics on its western border.
8. The map could be used to dispute which one of the following claims?
A. In forming the Warsaw Pact, the Soviet Union greatly increased its
access to oceanic coastline.
B. In forming the Warsaw Pact, the Soviet Union wished to increase its
trade with Africa.
C. The Warsaw Pact benefitted Bulgaria and Romania no less than the
Soviet Union.
D. The Warsaw Pact initially included Albania.
Question 9 refers to the following table and map.
Average Yearly Rainfall in
New England
State

Avg. Rainfall/Year

Connecticut

47 inches

Maine

41 inches

Massachusetts

45 inches

New Hampshire

42 inches

Rhode Island

44 inches

Vermont

39 inches

Source: netstate.com

9. What is the average (arithmetic mean) yearly rainfall, in inches, of the
three northernmost states in New England?
A.
B. 41
C. 42
D.
Question 10 refers to the following graph.
The graph below shows the percent of people who voted in presidential
elections from 1996 to 2012.

10. Over the period illustrated by the line graph, the rate at which eligible
black voters participated in presidential elections
A. fluctuated up and down, but ended higher than it began
B. steadily increased, surpassing that of white voters in the 2012
elections
C. increased sharply in the middle of the time period shown on the
graph before dropping back closer to its original level
D. was consistently lower than the rates of most other races and ethnic
groups
Answers and explanations for Social Studies, Part I start on page 639.

Social Studies Pretest
Part II: Social Studies Content—25
Questions
Directions: You may fill in the circles next to the correct answers or write
your answers on a separate piece of paper.
Questions 1 and 2 refer to the following map.

1. Based on this map, what were the three sides of the triangle in the
triangular trade?

A. Europe to the West Indies; the West Indies to Africa; Africa to the
British colonies
B. the West Indies to the British colonies; the British colonies to Africa;
Africa to the West Indies
C. the West Indies to England; England to the British colonies; the
British colonies to Africa
D. South America to Africa; Africa to the West Indies; the West Indies
to the
British colonies
2. Which statement is a conclusion based on the map rather than a supporting
detail from the map?
A. Cargo ships never had to sail empty on any leg of a profitable
triangular journey.
B. The journey of Africans from Africa to the Americas was called the
Middle Passage.
C. Slaves sometimes were transported on cargo ships from the West
Indies to the British colonies.
D. Rum was shipped from one of the ports on the east coast of North
America.
Question 3 refers to the following information.
Several types of U.S. banking institutions and some of their main services are
described below.
Federal Reserve Banks control the nation’s monetary policy and maintain
stability of the banking and financial systems.
Commercial banks accept deposits, make loans, and provide related services
to corporations and other businesses.
Retail banks provide savings and checking accounts, mortgages, personal
loans, and debit and credit cards to consumers.
Community development banks serve residents and spur economic

development in low- to moderate-income areas.
Credit unions provide their members with checking and savings accounts,
mortgages, and other services at a lower interest rate than other financial
institutions.
3. At which type of financial institution would the ABC Printing Company
be most likely to take out a loan to finance the purchase of a new printing
press?
A. Federal Reserve Bank
B. commercial bank
C. retail bank
D. community development bank
Questions 4 and 5 refer to the following
passage.
Somerville has had a long history of corruption. From the 1960s to the 1980s,
its mayor, councilors, and tax assessors were involved in a complex network
of bribery and favors. The “strong-mayor” system of government is
responsible for this corruption; in the history of Massachusetts, all but a
single instance of municipal corruption occurred under a strong-mayor
government. Because that tainted system is still in place to this day in
Somerville, the current mayor must be viewed with strong suspicion.
4. Which of the following words or phrases is based on the author’s opinion,
NOT fact?
A. long history
B. tainted system
C. bribery
D. mayors, councilors, and tax assessors
5. Is the author’s conclusion properly supported by evidence?
A. Yes, because the corruption in
Somerville spreads beyond the office of the mayor.

B. Yes, because 20 years of corruption can accurately be called a “long
history.”
C. No, because there is no mention of criminal investigation or charges.
D. No, because no indication is given that the current mayor will
behave as past mayors did.
6. Most Americans believe it is their duty as
citizens to take part in our system of
government.
Which of the following actions represents participation in government?
A. pursuing higher education
B. displaying the American flag
C. volunteering at a hospital
D. serving on a jury
7. In many Latin American countries, control passes back and forth between
military and civilian rule. Generally, when a civilian government rules, it
tries to improve conditions for the nation’s citizens, but these attempts
lead to turmoil and civil unrest. In response, the military takes power and
imposes strict controls on the populace. Such shifts have taken place in
Argentina, Peru, and Chile in recent decades.
Which of the following is highly valued by those who favor military rule?
A. social welfare
B. freedom
C. democracy
D. law and order
Questions 8 and 9 refer to the following chart.
Presidential Powers in Several Nations
Constitutional Power

U.S.A.

South
Africa

France Mexico

Controls armed forces

✔

✔

✔

✔

Approves legislation

✔

✔

✔

✔

Appoints executive branch
officials

✔

✔

✔

✔

Appoints judges

✔

✔

✔

✔

Appoints prime minister

✔

Dissolves legislature

✔

8. Which of the following is a difference between the powers of the U.S. and
French presidents?
A. The U.S. president controls the armed forces, and the French
president does not.
B. The U.S. president approves legislation, and the French president
does not.
C. The French president has the power to dissolve the legislature, while
the U.S. president does not.
D. The French president has the power to appoint judges, while the
U.S. president does not.
9. Which of the following statements is a conclusion based on the chart,
rather than a detail?
A. The president of South Africa cannot dissolve the legislature.
B. Of all the presidents shown, the French president has the greatest
variety of powers.
C. The president of Mexico has the power to appoint judges.
D. The U.S. president has the power to approve legislation.
Question 10 refers to the following paragraph.
After the Civil War, southern states passed Jim Crow laws, which kept whites
and blacks apart in public places like restaurants, buses, and
restrooms. In an 1896 case, Plessy v. Ferguson, the U.S. Supreme Court

upheld a Louisiana law requiring separate railroad cars for white and black
passengers. The Court ruled that it was constitutional to have “separate but
equal” facilities for whites and blacks and other minorities. The Court
reasoned that “legislation is powerless to eradicate racial instincts or to
abolish
distinctions.” One justice dissented, saying that the decision was
“inconsistent with the personal liberty of citizens, white and black.”
10. Which of the following statements is an opinion rather than a fact?
A. In the late 1800s, many southern states passed Jim Crow laws to
keep whites and blacks separate in public places.
B. In Louisiana, a law required separate railroad cars for white and
black passengers.
C. Plessy v. Ferguson was an 1896
Supreme Court case that challenged the Louisiana law related to
segregated railroad cars.
D. The U.S. Supreme Court ruling in Plessy v. Ferguson was wrong
because it infringed on freedoms guaranteed in the Constitution.
Questions 11 and 12 refer to the following paragraph and chart.
When the U.S. government cannot cover its expenses, it borrows money by
selling bonds. It pays back the principal and interest on the bonds over a
period of many years. The national debt is the total amount the U.S.
government owes at any particular point in time. In 2010, this was about
$13.2 trillion.
One way of measuring the national debt is by computing the per capita
national debt. The per capita national debt is the total national debt divided by
the population of the United States. The graph below shows the per capita
national debt every five years from 1990 to 2010.

Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census and Statistical Abstract of the United States

11. Which of the following conclusions is supported by the data in the
paragraph and the graph?
A. The nation’s debt increased at a faster rate than did the U.S.
population during the period shown on the graph.
B. Every person in the United States owed an average of $20,000 to the
government in the year 2000.
C. In 1990, the U.S. government owed every American about $13,000.
D. The U.S. government sold about
$5.7 trillion worth of bonds in 2000.
12. Which action would enable the
U.S. government to reduce its debt?
A. postpone payment of that debt
B. pay interest to foreign investors
C. pay interest to U.S. investors

D. raise taxes and cut spending
Question 13 refers to the following paragraph.
The ninth-century B.C.E. collapse of the Mayan empire is often attributed to a
massive drought. But new geological and archaeological evidence from the
Yucatan peninsula in Mexico shows that the Maya engaged in massive
deforestation, clearing land for crops and burning the wood to bake bricks for
their cities and temples. Modern weather models show that the destruction of
native vegetation could have contributed to as much as 60 percent of the dry
weather that is believed to have ended this civilization.
13. According to the theory presented in the paragraph, what was the effect
of Mayan deforestation of the Yucatan peninsula?
A. The Mayans needed more land to grow crops.
B. Scientists discovered new evidence in the geological record.
C. A drought was significantly worsened due to lack of native
vegetation.
D. Baking bricks required an enormous amount of wood.
Question 14 refers to the following map.

14. Which of the following is a conclusion based on the map, rather than a
supporting detail from the map?
A. The Industrial Revolution took place in Great Britain around the
year 1830.
B. More than 300,000 people lived in Sheffield around 1830.
C. Many cities had large populations
because nearby coal and iron ore
deposits meant jobs.
D. There was a large area with coal
deposits in southern Wales around 1830.
15. When a nation follows a policy of appeasement, it makes concessions to

an aggressor in order to preserve the peace.
Which of the following is an example of appeasement?
A. Italy’s support of Spanish Nationalists in the Spanish Civil War in
the late 1930s
B. Great Britain’s acceptance of
Germany’s takeover of Austria and Czechoslovakia in the late 1930s
C. Germany’s 1939 invasion of Poland, which started World War II
D. Japan’s alliance with Germany and
Italy in 1940, which created the
Rome-Berlin-Tokyo Axis
Questions 16 through 18 refer to the following poster.

16. The person who designed this poster used irony to make a point. Behind
this irony was an assumption with which the designer expected viewers to
agree.
Which of the following statements summarizes this assumption?
A. People will give to the war effort
because they are doing well economically.
B. Financing the war requires selling bonds and raising taxes.
C. During wartime, people have little money to spend on their sons.
D. People value the lives of their children more than they value money.
17. During which war was this poster part of a government advertising

campaign?
A. the Civil War
B. World War I
C. World War II
D. the Vietnam War
18. If the government were running a similar advertising campaign today,
which medium would probably reach the most people?
A. posters
B. leaflets and brochures
C. print ads in financial newspapers
D. ads on social media
Question 19 refers to the following table.
The Five Most Populous American Colonies, 1750
Colony

Population (estimate)

Massachusetts

188,000

Pennsylvania

119,700

Connecticut

111,300

Maryland

141,000

Virginia

231,000

Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census

19. Which of the following statements is supported by the data in the chart?
A. The population of all of the American colonies was less than
700,000.
B. Virginia had more than twice as many people as Maryland.
C. Most of the population of Massachusetts was of English origin.

D. The population of the colony of
New York was smaller than that of Connecticut.
Questions 20 through 22 refer to the following paragraph and flowchart.
The U.S. Civil Service system is designed to ensure that people are appointed
to government positions because of their skills and abilities rather than
because of their political affiliation. Over 90 percent of federal jobs are
covered by civil service rules. The typical steps in applying for a civil service
job are shown below.

20. Which of the following is the best title for the flowchart?
A. A History of the Civil Service
B. The Qualifications of Civil Service Workers
C. Applying for Civil Service Jobs
D. Interviewing for a Civil Service Job
21. What does a civil servant’s GS rating probably affect most?
A. salary
B. length of service
C. job security
D. education level

22. On which of the following values does the structure of the Civil Service
system primarily rest?
A. patriotism
B. equal opportunity
C. freedom of speech
D. respect for seniority
Questions 23 and 24 refer to the following graphs.

Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census

23. In 2005, what were the approximate interest rate and approximate total
mortgage debt outstanding for a conventional mortgage?
A. 8 percent and $13,000 billion
B. 4 percent and $11,000 billion
C. 6 percent and $12,000 billion
D. 6 percent and $9,000 billion
24. Based on the graphs, how do mortgage interest rates and total mortgage
debt outstanding compare?
A. Interest rates rise in direct proportion to decreases in total mortgage
debt outstanding.
B. The higher the interest rate, the lower the total mortgage debt
outstanding.
C. The lower the interest rate, the higher the total mortgage debt
outstanding.
D. As interest rates rise and then fall, the total mortgage debt will move
similarly but not at the same rate.
25. A culture hearth refers to the center of a culture—the source of its ideas,
values, customs, fashions, and practices. An example of an ancient culture
hearth was the area along the Nile River in Egypt. The agricultural,
economic, social, artistic, and religious ideas and practices that grew up
there spread through trade to other areas of the ancient world.
Which of the following is an example of a modern culture hearth with
worldwide influence?
A. Pyongyang, capital of North Korea, which has a 95 percent literacy
rate
B. Ottawa, capital of Canada, with a population of about one million
C. New Zealand, which exports wool and textiles
D. Hollywood, California, which produces movies and television
shows, enjoyed around the world

Answers and explanations for Social Studies, Part II start on page 639.

Science Pretest
Part I: Science Practices—10 Questions
Directions: You may fill in the circles next to the correct answers or write
your answers on a separate piece of paper.
Questions 1 and 2 refer to the following
passage.
For many years, scientists believed that all living things depended on sunlight
for their energy. For example, human beings derive energy from food. Our
food comes either from plants that require sunlight or from animals, which
eat plants that require sunlight.
However, in the 1970s scientists discovered hot springs, called hydrothermal
vents, in the ocean floor. These vents are miles below the surface of the
ocean, far beyond the reach of sunlight. Yet these vents are surrounded by
fascinating life forms, including giant red tube worms, eyeless shrimp, hairylooking crabs, and communities of bacteria that grow like carpets on the
ocean floor.
Those bacteria feed on minerals, like sulfur, that flow upward through the
vents. The bacteria use a process called chemosynthesis to turn the minerals
into nutrition. The bacteria, in turn, are eaten by many of the animals that live
near the vents. Thus, those animals take in a source of energy that does not
derive from sunlight.
1. Which of the following would be a good title for this passage?
A. “The Advantages and Disadvantages of Life Near Hydrothermal
Vents”
B. “Hydrothermal Vents: A Potential Fuel Source for Our EnergyHungry Economy”
C. “Hydrothermal Vents Suggest That Not All Life Is Solar-Powered”

D. “Major 20th-Century Advances in Oceanography”
2. Which of the following is a detail that supports the main idea of the
passage?
A. Many scientists believe that all living creatures depend on sunlight
for their energy.
B. Hydrothermal vents were not discovered until the 1970s.
C. The hairy-looking crabs are covered in structures that enable them to
catch tiny particles of food.
D. No sunlight penetrates to the world of hydrothermal ocean vents.
Questions 3 and 4 refer to the following
passage.
In a radioactive element like uranium, atoms give off some of their particles.
In the 19th century, chemist Marie Curie discovered that the radioactivity of a
compound depends on the amount of a radioactive element it contains.
Then Curie noticed something strange. Pitchblende, a compound that
contains radioactive uranium, gives off more radiation than pure uranium.
Curie wondered why that would be the case. She guessed that pitchblende
might contain another element that was even more radioactive than uranium.
To find out, Curie and her husband isolated
the elements that make up pitchblende. After isolating each element, they
measured its radioactivity. As a result of this process, the Curies discovered
that pitchblende contains a highly radioactive element, which no one had
identified before. They named their discovery polonium.
3. Which of the following restates Marie Curie’s hypothesis about
pitchblende?
A. Pitchblende contains uranium.
B. Uranium interacts with the nonradioactive elements in pitchblende to
increase its radioactivity.
C. Polonium was discovered by the Curies as a result of their
experiment.

D. Pitchblende contains an element that is more radioactive than
uranium.
4. Which of the following is a reasonable conclusion based on Curie’s
experiment?
A. Pitchblende is more radioactive than pure uranium because it
contains
polonium.
B. Polonium is only one of many reasons why pitchblende is more
radioactive than pure uranium.
C. Marie Curie would become famous.
D. The Curies were not the first physicists to isolate polonium.
Questions 5 and 6 refer to the following
passage.
The ozone layer is a part of the upper atmosphere with high concentrations
of ozone, a form of oxygen. The ozone layer absorbs between
97 percent and 99 percent of the sun’s medium-frequency ultraviolet light,
which can cause skin damage and even skin cancers. For this reason,
depletion of the ozone layer is a potentially global health risk. The ozone
layer has been decreasing in thickness for decades due to atmospheric
pollution. In particular, chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), used in aerosol sprays
and refrigerators, were so harmful to the ozone layer that a global ban was
implemented in 1994, and production had almost entirely ceased by 2004.
However, this ban was not effective; the hole in the ozone layer that appeared
over Antarctica reached its largest recorded size in 2006.
5. Which evidence from the passage supports the conclusion that CFCs
remain in the atmosphere for some time after their use?
A. The ozone layer started thinning
decades ago.
B. The hole in the ozone layer reached its largest size after CFCs were
banned from production and use.
C. CFCs are used both in aerosols and as refrigerants.

D. CFCs absorb medium-frequency ultraviolet light.
6. Which of the following additional pieces of evidence would best counter
the author’s opinion that the ban on CFCs was NOT effective?
A. The ozone hole is not literally a hole but rather an area in which the
ozone layer is depleted by more than 50 percent.
B. While the ozone layer continues to thin, it is thinning at a rate much
lower than it has in the past.
C. Skin cancer rates near the equator,
far from Antarctica, have not changed significantly since 1994.
D. The CFC ban contains a few extremely narrow exceptions for uses
where no suitable replacement exists, such as in fire-suppression
systems on airplanes.
Questions 7 and 8 refer to the following text.
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is one of the most important chemicals for
the function of the cells of all known living organisms. It stores and
transports energy within and between cells. When a cell needs to use this
energy, a chemical reaction releases it. Adenosine triphosphate and water can
combine to remove either a phosphate (Pi) or pyrophosphate (PPi) from the
ATP, leaving adenosine diphosphate (ADP) or adenosine monophosphate
(AMP), respectively.

7. Which answer choice describes the process in the equation
A. Adenosine triphosphate is transported from one part of a cell to
another.
B. Adenosine triphosphate is broken down into adenosine
monophosphate and a pyrophosphate, releasing energy.

C. Adenosine monophosphate is broken down into water and a
pyrophosphate, releasing energy.
D. Adenosine monophosphate stores
energy, which is transported to another cell.
8. Which of the following chemicals plays a role most similar to that of
ATP?
A. Lactase, which breaks down the lactose sugar found in milk for
easier
digestion
B. DNA, which is found in the nucleus of every cell and contains
instructions for the cell to manufacture proteins
C. Hemoglobin, which allows red blood cells to carry oxygen
D. Glycogen, which stores sugars that
can be broken off in differing amounts when the body needs energy
Question 9 refers to the following information and table.

9. An equal number of seeds are produced from each of two pairs of flowers.
One pair is a purebred pink plant with dominant pink genes (P) and a
purebred white plant with recessive white genes (p). The other pair is
made up of two hybrid plants, which are pink. The Punnett squares above
show all possible combinations of alleles for the two pairs. If a seed is
selected at random from the offspring of those two pairs, what is the
probability that the selected seed will grow to be white?

A.

B.

C.

D.
Question 10 refers to the following graph.

10. A ball was dropped onto a surface from different heights, and the height
of the first bounce of each drop was recorded. The graph above illustrates
the initial heights and bounce heights of the six trials in the experiment.
What was the average (arithmetic mean) difference between the drop
height and the first bounce height, in feet?

A.
B.
C. 8
D. 21
Answers and explanations for Science, Part I start on page 641.

Science Pretest
Part II: Science Content—28 Questions
Directions: You may fill in the circles next to the correct answers or write
your answers on a separate piece of paper.
Question 1 refers to the following paragraph and diagram.
A neuron is the basic functional unit of the nervous system. Neurons transmit
information throughout the body.

1. Which of the following is implied by the paragraph and the diagram?
A. Neurons are part of the endocrine
system.
B. Oxygen is carried throughout the body by neurons.
C. Neurons transmit instructions regarding movement to muscles.

D. Nerve impulses travel from the axon to the cell body.
2. A comet is a small body made of ice and dust that orbits the sun in an
elliptical, or oval, path. As the comet approaches the
sun, its core heats up, releasing gas and dust. The gas and dust stream
away from
the comet in a tail that may be millions of miles long. Some scientists
believe that comets formed when the solar system was born.
Based on the paragraph, which of the following statements is an opinion
rather than a fact?
A. Comets are small bodies of ice and dust.
B. The orbit of a comet has an elliptical shape.
C. Comets release gas and dust as they approach the sun.
D. Comets formed when the solar system was born.
3. In a photochemical reaction, light starts the reaction. Light can start a
chemical reaction by exciting atoms and molecules, making them unstable
and more likely to react with other atoms and molecules.
Which of the following is an example of a photochemical reaction?
A. polymerization, in which long-chain
organic compounds are formed from repeating units called monomers
B. fractional distillation, in which various petroleum products are
separated out of crude oil
C. neutralization, in which an acid and a base react to form a salt and
water
D. photosynthesis, in which green plants use the energy from sunlight
to make carbohydrates from water and carbon dioxide
Questions 4 through 6 refer to the following chart.
Some Glands of the Endocrine System
Endocrine

Hormone

Function

Gland
Pituitary
gland

Growth
hormone

Promotes bone and muscle growth

Ovary

Estrogen

Stimulates development of female secondary
sexual characteristics

Testis

Testosterone Stimulates development of male secondary
sexual characteristics

Adrenal
gland

Adrenaline

Increases heart activity, breathing rate, and
blood flow to muscles for “fight or flight”

Thyroid

Thyroxine

Regulates metabolism and growth

Pancreas

Insulin

Regulates blood sugar levels

4. What is the function of the hormone
thyroxine?
A. It controls female secondary sexual characteristics.
B. It controls male secondary sexual characteristics.
C. It speeds up the pulse and breathing rate for “fight or flight.”
D. It helps control metabolism and growth.
5. People who have one form of the disease diabetes mellitus do not produce
enough insulin. Based on the chart, what is the general effect of this
disease?
A. stunted growth
B. excess growth
C. overproduction of estrogen
D. uncontrolled blood sugar levels
6. Paul, a child who was not growing as rapidly as he should, was given
growth hormone to stimulate his growth. Paul anticipated that the
hormone would enable him to reach an adult height of over six feet, even
though his parents are both below average height. In fact, Paul’s adult
height was 5 feet 7 inches.

What was wrong with Paul’s thinking?
A. Growth hormone is only one of several factors that determine a
person’s adult height.
B. Growth hormone, when administered as a drug, does not affect a
person’s height.
C. In order to grow to over six feet tall, Paul would have had to take
insulin, too.
D. In order to grow to over six feet tall, Paul would have had to take
testosterone, too.
7. An emulsion is a mixture of two liquids whose particles are evenly
scattered in one another without dissolving. Emulsions are unstable. After
a time, the liquids separate.
Which of the following is an emulsion?
A. tea with sugar
B. salt water
C. oil and vinegar salad dressing
D. food coloring and water
8. Earth science includes the study of Earth’s atmosphere—the layer of gases
that surrounds Earth—and Earth’s hydrosphere—the oceans, rivers, lakes,
and groundwater.
Which of the following scientists would be most likely to apply knowledge
from a study of both the atmosphere and hydrosphere to his or her work?
A. a geologist who studies volcanoes and mountain formation
B. an astronomer who studies the planets of the solar system
C. a meteorologist who studies weather patterns and predicts weather
D. an ecologist who studies the distribution of populations of organisms
Question 9 refers to the following chart.
Organisms in a Food Chain

Role

Description

Producer

A green plant, which produces its own food using energy
from sunlight

Herbivore

An animal that gets nutrients by eating plants

Carnivore

An animal that gets nutrients by eating other animals

Omnivore

An animal that gets nutrients by eating both plants and
animals

Decomposer An organism that gets nutrients from feeding on dead
organisms and returns nutrients to the soil in the process
9. Earthworms break down large pieces of dead organic material in the soil.
What role do earthworms play in the food chain?
A. They are producers.
B. They are herbivores.
C. They are carnivores.
D. They are decomposers.
Question 10 refers to the following graph.

10. Suppose a child’s diet usually includes two servings of cheese, four
servings of milk, one serving of ice cream or frozen yogurt, one serving of
ground beef, and a croissant or bagel every day.
If the child’s parent wanted to decrease the amount of saturated fat in the
child’s daily diet, which of the following actions would be most effective?
A. switch from regular to low-fat cheddar
B. switch from whole milk to 1 percent milk

C. switch from frozen yogurt to ice cream
D. switch from regular to extra lean ground beef
11. Torque is the ability of a force to produce rotation. The torque of any
force is equal to the amount of the force multiplied by the distance from
the pivot point to the point where the force is applied. For example, when
you go through a revolving door, you are applying force as you push. The
torque of your force is equal to the force you apply times the distance
between your hand and the axis of the revolving door.
Which of the following actions would decrease torque as you go through a
revolving door?
A. moving your hand closer to the center of the revolving door
B. moving your hand closer to the outer edge of the revolving door
C. pushing with two hands rather than one hand
D. leaning toward the door as you push to increase your force
Question 12 refers to the following graph.

12. Of the four energy sources shown, which two are the most similar in the
proportion of energy they supply in the United States?
A. coal/peat and natural gas
B. natural gas and nuclear fuels
C. nuclear fuels and liquid fuels

D. liquid fuels and natural gas
Question 13 refers to the following paragraph and map.
In 1620, the eastern half of the United States was covered by virgin forest—
forest that had never been cut down. Many parts of this region today are
covered by second-growth forest—the ecosystem that eventually grows back
after farmland is abandoned.

13. Which of the following conclusions is supported by the paragraph and the
map?
A. The western half of the United States had far less forest cover in
1620 than did the eastern half.
B. As European Americans moved from the East Coast westward
between 1620 and 1850, they cut down forests to build farms.
C. A number of relatively large areas of virgin forest remain in the
eastern half of the United States today.
D. Today’s second-growth forests in
the eastern United States have fewer species of plants and animals than
the virgin forest did.

Questions 14 and 15 refer to the following information and diagram.
The seasons occur because the axis of Earth is tilted. At different times of
year, different parts of Earth get more hours of higher-intensity sunlight. As
the diagram shows, summer begins in the Southern Hemisphere on December
21, when that hemisphere is tilted toward the sun.

14. Which portion of Earth is tilted toward the sun on June 21?
A. the Southern Hemisphere
B. the Northern Hemisphere
C. the axis
D. the equator
15. Which of the following statements is supported by the information in the
diagram?
A. Earth rotates once around its axis each and every day.
B. When it is summer in the Northern Hemisphere, it is summer in the
Southern Hemisphere.
C. On March 21, the Northern Hemisphere is tilted toward the sun.

D. On the first day of spring and fall, neither the Northern Hemisphere
nor the Southern Hemisphere is tilted toward the sun.
16. Ecologists use a tool called a quadrat when doing field studies of plant
distribution. A quadrat is an open, four-sided structure about a meter
square. It is placed on the ground, whether in a meadow, on a hillside, or
at the beach. The ecologist then counts the plants of different species
inside the quadrat. By using a quadrat, an ecologist can get a more
accurate understanding of species distribution than by doing a random
count.
Which of the following statements can be inferred from the given facts?
A. A quadrat is a tool used by ecologists.
B. A quadrat is a frame about a meter square.
C. To use a quadrat, the ecologist places it on the ground.
D. A quadrat makes plant distribution estimates more reliable.
17. According to Charles’s Law, when the pressure of a gas remains
constant, the volume of a quantity of gas varies directly with the
temperature. In other words, as the temperature of a gas rises, the volume
of the gas increases.
Which of the following graphs illustrates Charles’s Law?

A.

B.

C.

D.

18. At the beginning of the twentieth century, only three subatomic particles
were known: protons, neutrons, and electrons. In the last half of the
century, dozens of new particles were discovered using new technology.
Machines called particle accelerators push particles to tremendous speeds.
When two particles collide at high speed, they annihilate each other and
new particles are formed.
Which of the following is NOT stated in the passage?
A. Protons, neutrons, and electrons are subatomic particles.
B. Atoms are composed of subatomic particles.
C. In particle accelerators, particles are pushed to very high speeds.
D. Particles that collide at high speed
annihilate each other, forming new particles.
19. Density is the amount of matter, or mass, in a given volume of a
substance. To find the density of an object, you divide its mass by its
volume. A student wanted to find the density of a 3-cm cube of lead. First,
she used a scale to find the mass of the cube. Next, she calculated the
volume by multiplying
. Finally, she divided the volume by the mass
to find the density of the lead cube.
Why was the density the student calculated inaccurate?
A. A scale cannot be used for finding mass.

B. Multiplying three sides of the cube will not give the cube’s volume.
C. The student should have found the volume first.
D. The student should have divided the mass by the volume.
Questions 20 and 21 refer to the following information and diagram.
When the U.S. Mint had to design a new dollar coin to replace the old Susan
B. Anthony
dollar, it faced a problem. It wanted to design
an appealing, distinctive golden-color coin
that vending machines would recognize as
an Anthony dollar, which looks like a quarter. Vending machines identify
coins by their weight, size, and electromagnetic signature. They test
a coin by passing an electric current through
it and measuring the resulting magnetic field. Thus, the new Sacagawea
dollar coin had to be similar to the Anthony dollar in size, weight, and
electromagnetic signature.
Size and weight were easy to imitate, but the electromagnetic signature was
not. The Anthony dollar had a copper core covered by a silver-colored
copper-nickel alloy. All the golden alloy sample coins had three times as
much electrical conductivity as the Anthony dollar. Vending machines did
not recognize them. Finally,
metallurgists came up with the idea of adding manganese, which has low
conductivity, to zinc and copper. The result was a coin consisting of 77
percent copper, 12 percent zinc, 7 percent manganese, and 4 percent nickel.
The pure
copper core was covered with a golden alloy of manganese, zinc, copper, and
nickel. This golden coin has electromagnetic properties similar to those of the
Anthony dollar, so it is recognized by U.S. vending machines.
20. It can be inferred from the passage above that an alloy is
A. a magnetic material
B. a material that stops electricity
C. a mixture of metals
D. the core of a coin

21. The U.S. Mint could have solved its technical problems with the
Sacagawea dollar by making it out of the same metals as the Anthony
dollar. Why did the people at the Mint decide against this?
A. The metals in the Anthony alloy were too rare and expensive to use
in the new coin.
B. Like nickels, dimes, and quarters, the Anthony dollar was silvercolored and therefore not distinctive.
C. The electromagnetic signature of the Anthony coin was not
recognized by vending machines.
D. The size and weight of the Anthony coin made it impractical for use
in vending machines.
Question 22 refers to the following chart.
Types of Plants
Type

Characteristics

Annual

Completes life cycle in one growing season

Biennial

Completes life cycle in two growing seasons; flowers during
second year

Perennial Lives for years and flowers each year
Tender

Sensitive to cold (can be annual, biennial, or perennial)

Hardy

Can withstand frosts (can be annual, biennial, or perennial)

22. Marion has little interest in or time for gardening, yet she would like to
have flowers in her front yard. Which of the following types of plants
would probably give her the most flowers for the least effort?
A. annuals
B. biennials
C. tender plants
D. hardy perennials

Question 23 refers to the following information and diagram.
How a Reflecting Telescope Works

23. If the flat mirror were removed from this telescope, what would happen
as a result?
A. Light rays would not enter the telescope.
B. Light rays would not reflect off the curved mirror.
C. A viewer could not see anything through the telescope.
D. A viewer could see only objects that were in focus.
24. The discovery of a new drug was once
largely the result of trial and error, laboratory experiments, and clinical
trials. Although these methods are still used, computer science is being
applied to the drug discovery process to refine it and speed it up. For
example, computers can analyze genetic material to locate genes that may
hold promise in the development of new drugs. Computers can analyze
data generated by lab experiments. Computer simulations can even help
predict how a particular drug will work under specific circumstances.
What is the main reason that computers are now being used in the drug
discovery process?

A. They enable scientists to abandon trial-and-error methods.
B. They help scientists analyze large amounts of data in a systematic
way.
C. They have made laboratory experiments unnecessary.
D. They have made clinical trials unnecessary.
25. People planning to visit tropical countries may need to be vaccinated
against disease. For example, two to four weeks before a trip, travelers
should be vaccinated against typhoid fever. The vaccine is 50 to
80 percent effective. Additional precautions against typhoid fever include
avoiding food and water that may be dirty.
If a traveler is vaccinated against typhoid fever two to four weeks before a
brief trip to the tropics, which of the following best explains why he or she
should take extra precautions against contracting the disease?
A. The typhoid fever vaccination is effective for only a few months.
B. The typhoid fever vaccination is only 50 to 80 percent effective.
C. The typhoid fever vaccination can cause soreness, fever, and
headache.
D. Typhoid fever spreads only through air and water.
26. The moon cycles through eight phases in 29.53 days.

Which statement correctly describes the phases of the moon as seen from
Earth?
A. The phases of the moon are caused by the shadow of the Earth
falling on the moon.
B. When the moon-Earth-sun angle is 90 degrees, the moon is in the
waxing crescent moon phase.
C. When the moon appears, from Earth, to be 50% illuminated, it is in
the waning gibbous phase.
D. The full moon appears when the moon and the sun are on opposite
sides of the Earth, such that sunlight strikes the moon at a 180° angle.
27. Hemodialysis is a type of dialysis treatment for kidney failure. Over the

course of four weeks, patients with kidney failure received either
hemodialysis with glucose added to the dialysis fluid or hemodialysis
without glucose added. The patients’ blood pressures were measured at
the end of each week.
Which of the following correctly identifies the independent and dependent
variables?
A. The independent variable is kidney health, and the dependent
variable is glucose concentration of dialysis fluid.
B. The independent variable is kidney health, and the dependent
variable is blood pressure.
C. The independent variable is glucose concentration of the dialysis
fluid, and the dependent variable is blood
pressure.
D. The independent variable is blood pressure, and the dependent
variable is glucose concentration of the dialysis fluid.
28. Electrostatic force is the force between two charged objects, such that
unlike charges attract and like charges repel. Adenosine triphosphate
(ATP) consists of three negatively charged phosphate groups, whereas
adenosine monophosphate (AMP) consists of one. Which of the following
explains why AMP is more stable than ATP?
A. Like charges repel, so the electrostatic repulsion of the negative
charges makes ATP less stable.
B. Like charges attract, so the electrostatic attraction of the negative
charges makes AMP more stable.
C. Unlike charges repel, so the electrostatic repulsion of the negative
charges makes ATP less stable.
D. Unlike charges attract, so the electrostatic attraction of the negative
charges makes AMP more stable.
Answers and explanations for Science, Part II start on page 641.

Congratulations! You have completed the Pretests.
Reminder: Your next step is to check your answers using the Pretest Answers
and Explanations that begin on page 632 and fill in the study planners on
pages xviii through xxii.

UNIT 1

Reasoning through Language Arts
About the Test
The GED® Reasoning through Language Arts Test (RLA) evaluates your
reading and writing skills: You will have 2.5 hours for about 50–55 questions
that require you to
answer questions based on single passages and on passages that are
paired together (reading and thinking skills);
review written text and select words and phrases so that the final
product is written correctly (language skills); and
compose an extended response to a writing prompt based on reading
one or two passages or a passage accompanied by a graphic (writing
skills).
The first section of the test includes reading and language questions. In the
second section, you will write the essay, or Extended Response. You will
have a 10-minute break before the third section, which includes reading and
language questions only.
You will need a minimum score of 145 to pass the Reasoning through
Language Arts Test, which is one of the four tests you will need to pass in
order to earn a high school equivalency diploma.

Reading Content Areas
You will answer questions based on a wide range of types of reading
materials. Seventy-five percent of the questions are based on informational
texts, which include workplace- and community-based documents, general
nonfiction, and nonfiction related to general interest social studies and
science topics. Twenty-five percent of the questions are based on fiction
selections.

Language Content Areas
The language skills model real-life editing to ensure correct sentence
structure, agreement (subject-verb and pronoun-antecedent), capitalization,
punctuation, homonyms, and possessives. The questions also assess
appropriate word choice and elimination of informal usage to fit the
purpose of the writing task.

Extended Response
The Extended Response requires reading text materials and responding to a
writing prompt (assignment) by developing an argument and supporting
your ideas with evidence from the text.

Computer-Based RLA Test Question Formats
You will work with several different question formats on the RLA Test.
Many of the questions will be in the familiar multiple-choice format, but you
will need to be acquainted with the other formats as well.
Multiple-choice questions have four options (A through D). You will click
on the best answer.

In this passage, William tells Jordan about his life experiences and plans
for the future. What do his stories indicate about his past?
A. He has already seen too much.
B. He has never been certain of his place in the world.
C. He wishes he had made different decisions in the past.
D. He is proud of his accomplishments and hopes to help
others.

Fill-in-the-blank questions will require you to type a word, phrase, or
number in a box that appears on the screen.

Which phrase from paragraph 2 describes how an employee should fill
out the shipping authorization form? Type your answer in the box
below.

GED® TEST TIP
Test each one of the drop-down options in the context of the
sentence before you make your final choice. Do not select an
option that “seems” right until you have tested all of the
choices and have a clear idea about why it is correct.
Drop-down questions give you the opportunity to click the word “Select” and
choose the option that correctly completes the sentence. (This format is only
used to assess language skills.)

Technical Corporation strives to provide excellent service. We have a
history of providing outstanding technical and customer support and
always aim to give 100%. When customers express concerns or
complaints, we respond immediately to show that we value
feedback.

The words that appear in a drop-down menu when you click on “Select” are

Some of the questions in this book are designed to mimic this drop-down
menu format. When you see the word “Select” in a question in this book,
choose the option that best completes the sentence.
Drag-and-drop items require you to click on a word or short phrase and to
drag and drop it to a specified location on the computer screen.

GED® TEST TIP
The Extended Response will be the last question before the 10minute break on the RLA Test. Carefully watch both the Time
Remaining and Question bars at the top of the computer
screen. Make sure you are allowing yourself 45 minutes for this
task.
An Extended-Response item requires you to type in a text box in response to
a prompt (writing assignment) based on one or more short passages, a
graphic, or a combination.
You will have 45 minutes to read the materials and to plan, write, and revise
your response.

This article presents arguments from both sides of the debate about
global warming.
In your response, analyze both arguments presented in the article to
determine which one is best supported. Use specific, relevant evidence
from the article in order to support your response.

Extended Response Question on the RLA Test
An important task on the RLA Test involves writing an extended response to
a passage, two passages, or a passage accompanied by a graphic. This activity
integrates reading and analytical skills with writing skills. The lessons in
Writing About Text, on pages 146–171, give you a step-by-step approach to
completing this task.

GED® TEST TIP
Preview the writing prompt before you read the passage(s).
This will help you focus your reading to select key details and
evidence that you will use to support your position.
Look at how a sample passage and writing prompt will appear on the
computer screen. You will need to tab through the reading passage or
passages and compose your response in the word processing text box.

You can take up to 45 minutes at the end of the first section of the RLA Test
to complete the assignment. This task has its own clock to help you manage
your time. See page 154 for a suggested time management plan to do the
following:
Preview the writing prompt.
Read the selection or selections, carefully using the highlighter tool to
draw attention to information for later use.
Compose a thesis statement.
Gather evidence from the text to support your thesis statement.
Plan your response (use the off-line wipe-off board).
Draft your response (in the text box that scrolls down).
Review your response to improve your writing and correct any errors
with the editing tools—cut, copy, paste, undo, and redo.

The Qualities of a Successful Extended Response

Your response can earn up to 6 points. It is reviewed for three different
“traits” or qualities, and each trait is assigned a score from 0–2. So, 3 traits
times a maximum of 2 points each equals a maximum of 6 points.

GED® TEST TIP
Keep in mind that your work on the test is considered to be a
“strong first draft,” in which you put forth your best effort
without a chance for a revised second draft.
If you practice writing throughout this book and use the selfevaluation checklists in the answer keys to make continual
improvements to your writing skills, you will be well prepared.
Unlike other writing that you may have done in the past, this task is
evidence-based writing, meaning that you need to base your position on the
information and arguments in the reading materials.
Trait 1: Creation of Arguments and Use of Evidence
To earn a score of 2 on Trait 1 you need to do the following:
Create an argument by making a logical claim that clearly states your
position.
Use three or more specific references from the text(s) to support
the claim.
Identify valid arguments and/or fallacious claims in the text(s).
Point out supported and/or unsupported claims in the text(s).
Trait 2: Development of Ideas and Organizational Structure
To earn a score of 2 on Trait 2 you need to accomplish these tasks:
Create an effective organizational structure.
Sequence ideas logically so that one idea leads to the next.

Elaborate main ideas and tie them to specific evidence from the text.
Make effective transitions to cohesively link ideas.
Use accurate and advanced word choice.
Employ an appropriate level of formality (no slang, etc.).
Trait 3: Clarity and Command of Standard English Conventions
To earn a score of 2 on Trait 3, you need to have few errors that would
interfere with a reader’s understanding of what you wrote. You should also
do the following:
Use varied and correct forms of sentence structure.
Maintain subject- verb and pronoun-antecedent agreement.
Adhere to the rules of capitalization, punctuation, and spelling.
Distinguish between commonly confused words, such as possessives
and homonyms.
Avoid wordiness and awkward constructions.

CHAPTER 1

Interpreting Nonfiction and
Informational Text
Lesson 1: Main Ideas and Details
Key Ideas
The most important point of a passage is called the main idea.
Sometimes a main idea is stated, but often you must figure it out.
Supporting details point to and explain the main idea.

The Main Idea
A writer has a message, or main idea, to get across. Sometimes the main idea
is stated directly; often you have to figure it out yourself. You can find the
main idea by asking, “What is the most important point the writer is
making?” Most of the information in a passage will point to and explain the
main idea.

As you read this passage, ask yourself what main point the writer is making.
The answer will be the main idea.
When I am reading a poem, I rarely feel alone in the room. The poet
and I are together. It’s as if the poet wrote a secret diary years ago. I
am unlocking it as I sit alone and read.
At times I don’t understand what a poem means. I just like the way it
sounds or the strange images that it provokes. The world is so peculiar
in a poem. At the same time, it is so enticing. Sometimes I understand
exactly, as if the poet is whispering to me, as if we shared the same
experience.
I must be fully concentrated on reading, or I cannot enter the world of
a poem. There are too many daily tasks to attend to—tasks that are
very far removed from the magic and imagination involved in a poem.
On a cold, snowy day, I cuddle up inside my apartment and read and
read. Then, I’m free to ride through the imagination of all those who
came before me.

GED® TEST TIP
Be sure you don’t confuse a supporting detail of a passage with
the main idea. If you are asked for the main idea, choose the
most important, general point.
▶ Which of the following statements expresses the main idea?
(1) The writer has a love of poetry.
(2) The writer cuddles up on cold days to read.
You are correct if you chose (1). While the passage mentions that the writer
reads on cold days, the main point of all the information is how much the
writer enjoys reading poetry.

Each paragraph has a main idea. To find the main idea of a passage with
more than one paragraph, put together the ideas from all the paragraphs.

Supporting Details
A writer explains the main idea of a passage with supporting details.
Supporting details include facts, examples, descriptions, and specific
pieces of information. When you read, you need to identify details that support the main idea.
▶ Which detail helps you understand the writer’s main point?
(1) At times, the writer does not understand a poem.
(2) The writer feels poetry is filled with magic and imagination.
You are correct if you chose (2). That detail helps you see that the main idea
is the writer’s love of poetry. The fact that the writer doesn’t always
understand a poem is true, but it alone does not support the main idea.

Practice 1
Questions 1 through 5 refer to the following passage from a diary.
Excerpted from Ariadne's Thread
1

I feel I have never had a home. All my life moving from place to
place. The only thing that remained the same, that was stable, was Oklahoma. Even the landscape never changed. The towns there never grew
up into cities. The people were the same each year, wearing the same
clothing, saying the same things.
2 The search for a homeland is part of the Chickasaw migration legend.
It was ordained by the deities and began in the past when the people
lived in the land of the “setting sun.” During the days they would walk
over the land, searching for their home. The priests carried a pole. They
carried it in their hands by day and planted it each night. During the
night it moved about and by morning it would be pointing the direction

they were to travel. For a while it commanded the people to journey east,
toward the morning sun. They crossed the Mississippi River eventually,
and on the other side, the pole finally ceased to move during the night.
The land was settled, crops were planted. It became known as the Old
Fields. But one morning the pole leaned westward. The people gathered
together and began the long journey back. They abandoned their village
but did not feel sorrow because the pole had commanded it.
3 And I am still moving, looking for a home. I don’t know if I will ever
escape my tradition, my past. It goes with me everywhere, like a
shadow.
By Linda Hogan from Ariadne’s Thread, edited by Lyn Lifshin, New York: Harper & Row,
1982.

1. How does the author describe herself?
She feels as if she is
A. searching for a place to call home
B. doomed to stay in Oklahoma
C. tired of the sameness in her life
D. being shadowed by failure
2. Who do the Chickasaw believe are responsible for making them move?
A. the priests
B. white people
C. themselves
D. the gods
3. Why did the Chickasaw not feel sad when they left their homes in the east?
A. They knew they were headed to a better place to live.
B. They had been forced to move east to begin with.
C. They were returning to their ancient homeland.
D. It was simply part of their beliefs to follow the pole.

4. Which of the following best summarizes the main idea?
The writer
A. has always lived in Oklahoma and plans to stay there
B. feels trapped by tradition and wants to move far away
C. understands that her tendency to search is part of her Chickasaw
heritage
D. believes that people in Oklahoma are all the same
5. How does the statement “I don’t know if I will ever escape my tradition”
(paragraph 3) support the main idea?
It shows that the writer
A. is trying to escape by moving around
B. lives in a more modern time
C. believes in the power of Indian legends
D. accepts that she is Chickasaw
Answers and explanations start on page 645.

Lesson 2: Restatement and Summary
Key Ideas
To restate an idea, put it in your own words.
To summarize, choose the most important details that explain the
main idea of a piece.

Restating Ideas
Restating an idea means putting it into your own words. For example, a

friend may tell you that a movie wasn’t worth the eight dollars she spent on
it. You might then tell a coworker that your friend said the movie was no
good.
As you read the passage below, restate in your mind what you are reading.
In Canton, Ohio, we take our desserts seriously. There are two local
candy stores that receive over 90 percent of the city’s candy business:
Heggy’s and Baldwin’s. Those who prefer Heggy’s won’t befriend
anyone who buys their sweets at Baldwin’s.
My family has always patronized Heggy’s. At the Heggy’s factory,
Gerty wraps by hand each large chocolate candy in clear cellophane
wrap. She’s in the back of the store with her hairnet, seated at a table
filled with hundreds of chocolates. My favorite chocolates at Heggy’s
are the dark chocolate creams, peanut clusters, and caramels.
Heggy’s aficionados point out that their candy of choice is a larger
size and therefore superior. The rivalry runs deep . . . at Easter,
Hanukkah, Christmas, Thanksgiving, and all occasions. Baldwin’s
loyal followers claim its sweets are sweeter. It’s a feud over the best
chocolate in town.
▶ How do the people of Canton feel about chocolate candy?
(1) They consider it a serious health issue.
(2) They feel it’s important enough to take a stand on.

GED® TEST TIP
As you read a GED® passage, check your understanding by
pausing occasionally to see if you can restate and summarize
what you are reading.
You are correct if you chose (2). The phrase “take our desserts seriously”

means that the candy is important to people.
On the Reasoning through Language Arts Test, the correct answer will not
always use the exact words from the passage. You will have to recognize that
the idea has been restated.

Summarizing
If you want to tell a friend about a movie you liked, you might summarize
what happens in the movie. You certainly will not give all the details—that
would take too long. A summary includes only the most important facts and
ideas.
▶ Which of the following statements best summarizes the difference in
opinion over the candy?
(1) Some people prefer Heggy’s candy because it’s bigger, while others
prefer Baldwin’s because it’s sweeter.
(2) People argue whether to buy Heggy’s or Baldwin’s candy for different
holidays.
You are correct if you chose (1). The last paragraph sums up the difference in
people’s opinions. Statement (2) merely states a detail in the last paragraph.

Practice 2
Questions 1 through 3 refer to the following business letter.
EXCERPTED FROM THE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF BUSINESS LETTERS
Dear Richard,
1

Attached is a copy of my June 8th letter to Customer Service. After
having my car serviced on June 30th, the list of problems has grown.
These matters need your immediate attention.
2 Although I did finally receive my copy of the warranty after waiting

two months, it is not bumper-to-bumper as Mr. Schecht promised. It also
requires service at your facility unless the warranty administrator waives
that requirement. I purchased the car from you at a premium price with
the expectation that I would have a bumper-to-bumper warranty that I
could use at any dealer. I never would have bought this car from you if I
knew about these limitations. I expect two things: A written waiver from
the warranty administrator that allows me to have warranty service performed at any dealer, and a wrap-around warranty, provided at your
cost, that turns this limited warranty into the promised “bumper-tobumper” warranty.
3 I expect an itemized list of registration costs, and the exact amount of
credit I received from the Department of Motor Vehicles for the
canceled plates voucher I gave to Mr. Schecht. If there is a refund due, I
expect it within 15 days.
4 I expect a proper bill of sale that itemizes and describes the payments
for the alarm system and the extended warranty, and includes all the
items on the original bill of sale.
5 Your mechanic was unable to locate a cause for the burning smell.
The smell persists. I expect your written assurance that if and when the
cause for this smell becomes known, you will repair the problem at your
cost.
6 The mechanic did not repair the left front marker light, although he
promised he would. Enclosed is a copy of your invoice for this repair,
which wasn’t made, as well as an invoice from another dealer who
actually made the repair.
I expect reimbursement for $22.90.
cc: Joe Smith, Department of Consumer Affairs
Dear Richard, letter from The Encyclopedia of Business Letters, Fax Memos, and Email, Rev Ed
© 1999 Robert Bly and Regina Anne Kelly. Published by Career Press, Wayne, NJ. All rights
reserved.

1. The problems that the writer mentions in the first paragraph and outlines in
his letter include which of the following?
A. receiving repairs the writer did not ask for
B. rude treatment

C. lack of proper paperwork
D. the premium price paid for the car
2. What does the customer want done about the burning smell?
A. the mechanic to find the cause of the smell
B. the car to be repaired free of charge if the cause of the problem is
discovered
C. a refund of the money that was paid to have the problem fixed
D. reimbursement for having the problem fixed by another dealer
3. Which of the following statements best summarizes this letter?
A. A letter to customer service was never responded to and is being
attached.
B. Mechanics have been unable to fix one problem and did not fix a
second.
C. The service and warranty on the customer’s car have been
unacceptable.
D. Some dealers and garages are better than others.
Answers and explanations start on page 645.

Lesson 3: Application of Ideas
Key Ideas
Applying ideas means using information in a new but similar
situation.
To apply ideas, ask yourself, “How is this new situation just like the
situation in the passage?”

When you apply ideas, you use information you already know in a new but

similar situation. For example, suppose you know that a friend loves country
music. When you need to buy a gift for that friend, you walk past the jazz and
rock sections in the music store and head straight for the country. You’re
applying what you’ve learned about your friend to help you choose a gift.
To apply ideas when reading, look for elements in the new situation that are
similar to elements in the passage you have read. Read this selection and then
see if you can apply some of the ideas in it.
When the delivery truck pulled up to my house the day before my
mother’s birthday, I knew her gift had finally arrived. I was excited.
Not only had I ordered a beautiful art book for her, but I’d also
ordered a mystery novel for myself and a book each for my nephew
and niece. I couldn’t resist buying them while I was choosing my
mother’s gift from an online bookstore. The carton looked bigger than
I expected, but perhaps it had a lot of filler to keep the books from
becoming damaged.
I lugged the huge box into the kitchen so I could open it and begin
wrapping my mother’s gift. I tugged at the industrial staples and then
tore open the carton. To my surprise, it was filled with many copies of
the same book. To make matters worse, it was a book I had not
ordered. Who Moved My Cheese? What kind of book was that? And
who would order one copy of that book, let alone 11? I certainly
didn’t want these books. I knew my family wouldn’t want them
either. They wanted The Art of Diego Rivera, Harry Potter, and Dr.
Seuss. So much for buying online. I’m sticking to in-store buying.

GED® TEST TIP
Remember that you can tab backward or forward in a passage
on the computer screen to find information you need to answer
a question.
▶ Which of the following situations is most like the situation that happened to

the writer?
(1) buying groceries only to discover you brought someone else’s bag
home
(2) buying 11 boxes of the same pasta at the store
Option (1) is correct. It shares the elements of intending to buy something
and getting the wrong thing by mistake. The second option is wrong because
the writer did not intentionally buy 11 copies of the book. Now try this
question.
▶ If the writer attended an auction, she would be most likely to
(1) decide which item to bid on and how much she would bid
(2) get involved in the excitement and bid on many things
You are correct if you chose (2). The writer states that she couldn’t resist
buying additional items when she was shopping online. Therefore, she seems
the type to get caught up in buying things. If she had carefully chosen which
book to buy her mother and had ordered only that one, then option (1) would
be correct.

Practice 3
Questions 1 through 4 refer to the following excerpt
EXCERPTED FROM MAKING THE MOST OF YOUR MONEY
1
2

Once you stop using credit cards, three things will happen.
You will buy less—and whatever you do buy will probably be a less
expensive model or make. Studies have found that people spend more
when they pay with plastic, because it doesn’t feel like real money.
When it is real money, you’re more sensible.
3 Your total debt will shrink rapidly. You are paying off back bills, you
are not adding new ones, and you have extra money because you’re
buying less. That surplus cash will reduce your debt faster than you
could imagine.

You will grow incredibly smug. You’re the first on your block to get
out of debt. Others will follow, but you’ll be the first.
5 I’m not against credit cards. They’re easy to use. They’re handy. If
your card has a low annual fee and a 25-day, interest-free grace period
for paying your bills, you’re getting monthly loans for practically
nothing. What I’m against is buying more on your credit cards than you
can pay for at the end of the month.
6 Once you’ve fought your way out of debt you can start using credit
cards again—but only for the convenience of not carrying cash. Your
days of debt are done. A big expense may sometimes drive you over the
limit. A stereo. A llama. A hot-air balloon. Whenever you limp home,
back in debt, recite your mantra: “From now on, I’m not going to put
down a charge card for anything.” Stick with it until you’re free again.
4

From Making the Most of Your Money by Jane Bryant Quinn, New York: Simon & Schuster,
1991.

1. According to the writer, becoming debt free is a behavior most similar to
A. overcoming a bad habit
B. learning a new trick
C. forgetting a friend’s birthday
D. setting a good example
2. If you have five credit cards with high interest rates and no grace periods,
how can you become debt free?
A. pay your debt off slowly so that you have extra cash for necessities
B. never use the credit cards
C. use them only when it is not convenient to carry cash
D. cut up four of the credit cards right away
3. Which of the following situations is most like the process of becoming
debt free?
A. driving a car
B. wearing a patch to give up smoking

C. losing weight by avoiding all-you-can-eat buffets
D. running a marathon race
4. Earlier in the book, the author made the statement “It’s so simple that I’m
almost embarrassed to mention it. Don’t borrow any more.”
Based on this information and the information in this passage, with which
of the following statements would the author most likely agree?
A. “Money is the root of all evil.”
B. “You can never have enough money.”
C. “Live within your means.”
D. “You deserve only the best.”
Answers and explanations start on page 645.

Lesson 4: Cause and Effect
Key Ideas
To determine the cause of an event, answer the question “Why did
this happen?”
To determine an effect, ask yourself, “What was the result?”

When one event or idea influences another, there is a cause-and-effect
relationship. For example, if you forget to fill your car with gas, the car will
stall. The lack of gas is the cause, or the reason. The stalled car is the effect.
As you read this passage, look for cause-and-effect relationships.
He is deceptively sweet upon waking up, and lets out a large yawn,
showing his thin pink puppy tongue, and simultaneously letting out a
high-pitched squeaking sound. Not two minutes later, he’s eaten my
favorite magazine and stuffed his entire head in the kitchen

wastebasket to find a leftover turkey bone. The pup searches under
the bed, on top of the dresser, and beside the nightstand for anything
to chew. He’s on a rampage in the morning—it’s just his puppy
nature.
To calm him down, we head to the park for one hour of exercise with
the other neighborhood dogs. Afterwards, he plays with his stuffed
animal squeaky toy, sleeps for an hour, then finds his favorite bone.
He lies down like an angel, chewing with contentment.
▶ What causes the puppy’s owners to take him to the park?
(1) They like to see the other neighborhood dogs.
(2) The puppy is acting too wild and energetic.
You are correct if you chose (2). The first paragraph describes wild behavior,
and the second paragraph says, “To calm him down, we head to the park . . .”

GED® TEST TIP
In a GED® passage, a writer might discuss one cause and all
its effects, one effect and all its causes, or a chain of events in
which each effect becomes the cause of another event.
▶ Why is the puppy so wild and energetic?
(1) It is just the way a puppy is.
(2) He has a behavioral problem.
You are correct if you chose (1). The writer doesn’t indicate that the puppy’s
behavior is a problem. In fact, she clearly states that it’s just the puppy’s
nature.
▶ What effect does the activity in the park have on the puppy?
(1) It calms him and tires him out.

(2) It teaches him to obey his owner.
You are correct if you chose (1). When they get back from the park, the
puppy plays quietly, sleeps for an hour, and then lies down to chew.
▶ Why does a walk in the park have a calming effect on the puppy?
(1) because the puppy enjoys seeing the other dogs
(2) because the puppy gets plenty of exercise
You are correct if you chose (2). The exercise brings on the effect—calm
behavior. This cause is not directly stated. You have to apply what you know
about exercise and its effects in order to understand the relationship.

Practice 4
Questions 1 through 5 refer to the following excerpt from an essay.
EXCERPTED FROM “THE DEPRESSION”
1

Some events are so important that their influence cuts across class
lines, affects all races and ethnic groups, and leaves no region
untouched. The depression of the 1930s was such an event. No one who
lived through those years in the United States could ever completely
forget the bread lines, the millions of unemployed, or the forlorn and
discouraged men and women who saw their mortgages foreclosed, their
dreams shattered, their children hungry and afraid.
2 The depression was precipitated by the stock market crash in October
1929, but the actual cause of the collapse was an unhealthy economy.
While the ability of the manufacturing industry to produce consumer
goods had increased rapidly, mass purchasing power had remained relatively static. Most laborers, farmers, and white-collar workers,
therefore, could not afford to buy the automobiles and refrigerators
turned out by factories in the 1920s, because their incomes were too low.
At the same time, the federal government increased the problem through
economic policies that tended to encourage the very rich to over-save.
3 Herbert Hoover, a sensitive and humane engineer, had the misfortune

of being President when the depression began. Even though he broke
with the past and used the power of the federal government to stem the
tide of depression, especially through loans to businesses and banks, his
efforts proved to be too little and too late.
From “The Depression” from Generations: Your Family in Modern American History, 2nd ed.,
edited by James Watts and Allen F. Davis, New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1974, 1978.

1. According to the authors, why was the depression of the 1930s so
important?
A. It could have been prevented.
B. It was a time of economic hardship.
C. It affected nearly everyone.
D. It was unforgettable.
2. According to the passage, which of the following was an effect of the
depression?
A. Many people lost the mortgages on their homes.
B. The stock market collapsed in October 1929.
C. Herbert Hoover was elected president.
D. The rich began to save too much of their money.
3. According to the passage, which of the following was one cause of the
depression?
A. a static stock market
B. low worker incomes
C. not enough productivity
D. laborers refusing to buy products
4. In the early part of the depression, what effect did government policies
have on the economy?
A. Banks and businesses began to need loans.
B. They had little effect.

C. Some of the poorer people were helped.
D. The very rich were helped.
5. One person who lived during the depression stated, “I can remember one
time, the only thing in the house to eat was mustard. . . . And we can’t
stand mustard till today.”
This account supports which of the following ideas from the passage?
A. Workers should have been paid more.
B. The depression touched everyone.
C. Herbert Hoover could have done more to help the economy.
D. The depression left people emotionally scarred.
Answers and explanations start on page 645.

Lesson 5: Compare and Contrast
You are probably familiar with comparing and contrasting whenever you go
shopping. If you are looking at two cars or even two bottles of aspirin, you
want to know if the price of the two is the same or different.

Key Ideas
To compare ideas or things, find out how they are alike.
To contrast ideas or things, find out how they differ.
A writer might compare two things, contrast two things, or compare
and contrast in one passage.

Writers compare to point out what is similar and contrast to point out what
is different about ideas or things.
As you read this passage, look for things being compared and contrasted.

In December, it seems everyone is hurrying to bake holiday treats,
decorate, and buy gifts. Some holiday shoppers trek through store
after store, while others prefer catalog or online shopping. Just two of
the holidays that keep everyone so busy this time of year are
Christmas and Hanukkah.
These holidays are, of course, times of celebration. People plan
parties and family get-togethers. Both involve gift giving. Both also
coincide with the winter solstice in the Northern Hemisphere, a time
when many ancient cultures rejoiced.
Christmas is a celebration of the birth of Jesus, though celebrating
Christmas on December 25 did not become common until the fourth
century.
Hanukkah, the Jewish Festival of Lights, celebrates the belief that a
flask of oil sufficient for only one day miraculously burned for eight
days in a temple in the second century B.C.E. That’s why on Hanukkah
an additional candle is lit each evening until, on the eighth night of
the holiday, eight candles are burning.

GED® TEST TIP
In a GED® passage, a writer may (1) compare in one
paragraph and contrast in the next or (2) go back and forth,
discussing similarities and differences on different points.
▶ What is the writer comparing and contrasting?
(1) methods of shopping
(2) Christmas and Hanukkah
You are correct if you chose (2). The similarities and differences between the
two holidays are the focus of the discussion. Two methods of shopping are
merely mentioned.

▶ What is one basis on which the writer compares the two?
(1) time of year celebrated
(2) kinds of meals served
You are correct if you chose (1). The similarities discussed in this passage
include the time of the winter solstice in the Northern Hemisphere, close to
when each holiday is celebrated.
▶ What is one basis on which the writer contrasts the two?
(1) gift giving
(2) their histories
The correct answer is (2). The two holidays have very different histories.
Both holidays involve gift giving, so that is not a point of contrast.

Practice 5
Questions 1 through 5 refer to the following excerpt from a diary.
EXCERPTED FROM DIARIES OF THE WESTWARD JOURNEY
1

Mr. West from Peoria, Ill. had another man, his wife, a son Clay about
20 years of age and his daughter, America, eighteen. Unfortunately Mr.
West had gone to the extreme of providing himself with such a heavy
wagon and load that they were deemed objectionable as fellow
argonauts. After disposing of some of their supplies they were allowed
to join us. They had four fine oxen. This wagon often got stalled in bad
roads much to the annoyance of all, but as he was a wagon maker and
his companion a blacksmith by trade and both were accommodating
there were always ready hands to “pry the wheel out of mire.”
2 A mule team from Washington, D.C. was very insufficiently
provisioned . . . [by] Southern gentlemen “unused to work. . . .” They
deserted the train at Salt Lake as they could not proceed with their
equipment and it was easier to embrace Mormonism than to brave the
“American Desert.”

3

Much in contrast to these men were four batchelors Messers Wilson,
Goodall, Fifield and Martin, who had a wagon drawn by four oxen and
two milch cows following behind. The latter gave milk all the way to the
sink of the Humboldt where they died, having acted as draught animals
for several weeks after the oxen had perished. Many a cup of milk was
given to the children of the train and the mothers tried in every way
possible to express their gratitude.
By Catherine Haun from Women’s Diaries of the Westward Journey, edited by Lillian Schlissel,
New York: Schocken Books, 1982.

1. What did Mr. West do that allowed his group to join the wagon train?
A. make wagons for the others
B. bring four fine oxen
C. offer milk to the children
D. leave some of his possessions behind
2. What purpose did the cows serve?
A. They led the oxen through rough terrain.
B. They carried children when wagons were full.
C. They provided milk and pulled wagons.
D. They provided food and replaced the mules.
3. Which of the following is contrasted in this excerpt?
A. the provisions of each group of travelers
B. the stability of each of the wagons
C. the number of people in each group
D. the ability of each group to feed the children
4. Suppose the writer were comparing a woman with five children who could
sew and cook to one man with an old ox. Which of the following would
be her most likely response?
The writer would

A. be happy to have people who could cook and sew
B. prefer to add fewer people to the group of travelers
C. feel sorry for the man and welcome him
D. offer the man one of her own animals
5. Based on the information in this excerpt, how is this trip similar for all the
travelers?
A. They must cooperate and work together.
B. They will be rewarded for their efforts.
C. They have similar backgrounds and relate to each other.
D. They have all been forced to go on the journey.
Answers and explanations start on page 645.

Lesson 6: Conclusions and Generalizations
Key Ideas
A conclusion is an idea figured out from different pieces of
information.
You can use your knowledge of the real world to help you draw
conclusions when you read.

Conclusions
A detective draws a conclusion when he looks at different pieces of evidence
and figures out who committed a crime. A doctor draws a conclusion when
she looks at different symptoms and figures out what illness a patient has.
You, as a reader, can draw a conclusion when you take pieces of information
and put them together to figure out something that the writer has not directly

stated.
See what conclusions you can draw from this notice sent by an employer.
Thank you for sending your resume in response to our newspaper
advertisement. We consider our company—and especially our
employees—to be the best. And we want to keep it that way. For that
reason, we carefully review each resume that is sent to us. We want to
ensure that our company and the new employee we hire are a perfect
match.
This process, of course, takes some time. We want to assure you that
your resume is part of this process and will be reviewed. If we feel we
have an opening that matches your qualifications, we will contact
you. If you have not heard from us within ten business days of the
postmark of this notice, be assured that we will keep your resume on
file for one year and review it when future openings arise.

GED® TEST TIP
Be sure to read an entire passage before answering the
questions about it. That way, you’ll take all the information
into account and won’t “jump to conclusions.”
▶ If a job applicant has not heard from this company three weeks after reading
this notice, what can she conclude?
(1) The review process is taking longer than expected.
(2) She did not get the job that she applied for.
Option (2) is correct. The notice says that the review process takes some
time. It also says that the company will contact the applicant if it feels she
matches the opening. Finally, if she doesn’t hear from it within ten business
days, her resume will go on file. You can conclude that the review process
takes about ten business days, and if she hasn’t been contacted in that time,
she didn’t get the job.

▶ What kind of notice can you conclude this is?
(1) a personal note sent to this individual applicant
(2) a form notice sent to all applicants
Again, you’re correct if you chose (2). The way the notice is worded, with no
personal details, lets you conclude this. You can also use your knowledge of
the real world and business form letters to conclude that this, too, is a form.
▶ What conclusion can you draw about the company’s attitude?
(1) It cares about its employees and their job satisfaction.
(2) It cares only about profits and employee productivity.
You are correct if you chose (1). The fact that the company states not only
that it considers its employees to be the best but also that it takes the time to
communicate sincerely with potential employees lets you conclude that.

Practice 6.1
Questions 1 through 5 refer to the following excerpt from an
autobiography.
EXCERPTED FROM THE STORY OF MY LIFE
1

Once there were eleven tadpoles in a glass globe set in a window full
of plants. I remember the eagerness with which I made discoveries about
them. It was great fun to plunge my hand into the bowl and feel the
tadpoles frisk about, and to let them slip and slide between my fingers.
One day a more ambitious fellow leaped beyond the edge of the bowl
and fell on the floor, where I found him to all appearance more dead than
alive. The only sign of life was a slight wriggling of his tail. But no
sooner had he returned to his element than he darted to the bottom,
swimming round and round in joyous activity. He had made his leap, he
had seen the great world, and was content to stay in his pretty glass
house under the big fuchsia tree until he attained the dignity of froghood.
Then he went to live in the leafy pool at the end of the garden, where he

made the summer nights musical with his quaint love-song.
2 Thus I learned from life itself. At the beginning I was only a little
mass of possibilities. It was my teacher who unfolded and developed
them. When she came, everything about me breathed of love and joy and
was full of meaning. She has never since let pass an opportunity to point
out the beauty that is in everything, nor has she ceased trying in thought
and action and example to make my life sweet and useful.
3 It was my teacher’s genius, her quick sympathy, her loving tact which
made the first years of my education so beautiful.
From The Story of My Life by Helen Keller.

1. What can you conclude about the writer’s view of learning?
A. It is rewarding and one of life’s joys.
B. It is better with a strict teacher.
C. It happens very slowly, if at all.
D. It happens most often when you are alone.
2. What conclusion can you draw about the writer’s character?
The writer is
A. self-centered and demanding
B. confused and searching
C. fearful and shy
D. insightful and grateful
3. If Helen’s teacher was trying to teach her addition, what method would the
teacher most likely use?
A. make Helen stand and recite addition facts for one hour every day
B. assign an abundance of addition homework
C. show Helen how addition is used in everyday life
D. ask a well-known mathematician to teach the subject
4. How are the thoughts in this personal account organized?

A. as a comparison with a frog followed by a contrast
B. as a problem followed by its solution
C. in chronological order, or time sequence
D. as an anecdote followed by a generalization based on the anecdote
5. Later in her story, Helen compares a child’s mind to a shallow brook
“which ripples and dances merrily over the stony course of its
education. . . .” Based on this information and the excerpt above, what is
similar about the tadpole and a child?
A. They learn from others.
B. They are eager to grow into adulthood.
C. Youth can make them do dangerous things.
D. Their development is not entirely smooth.
Answers and explanations start on page 646.

Generalizations
A generalization is a broad statement about a group of people, objects, or
things or about a type of event. Usually, it takes something that is true in one
specific case and extends it to every possible case. For example, “My
hometown celebrated Independence Day with fireworks last summer” is a
fact about a specific Fourth of July in a specific town; a generalization could
be “Every Independence Day, my hometown celebrates with fireworks.”

Key Ideas
A generalization is a broad statement about a group or class.
When assessing a generalization, evaluate the writer’s evidence.
An important factor in thoughtful reading is distinguishing between
faulty and valid generalizations.

▶ Identify one statement with F for a fact and the other with G for
generalization.
(1) Every clerk in the store focuses on customer service more than any
other aspect of the job.
(2) Tina, the manager of the women’s shoe department, helps customers
select just the right pair of shoes.
If you identified option (2) as being a fact and option (1) as being a
generalization, you were correct. One hint that (1) is the generalization is the
word “every.” Words like all, never, and always show up in sentences that
make broad, sweeping statements. The sentence about Tina, on the other
hand, gives specific information about a specific person and so is not a
generalization.
Generalizations can be valid and true when properly made. A writer can
support a generalization with an example (like Tina, above) and information
that shows why the example represents the whole group. Often, a
generalization is too broad to apply to every member of a group, and a good
writer will acknowledge that there are exceptions.
“Dogs are typically more attached to their owners than cats are, due in part to
their evolution as pack animals. My dog will jump up to meet me as soon as I
get home from work, while my cat will continue napping serenely until
hunger motivates him to do otherwise.”

GED® TEST TIP
If you see a generalization, look for supporting evidence that
may be introduced by phrases such as “for example,” “such
as,” or “ for instance.”
▶ What example is given to support the generalization that “Dogs are typically
more attached to their owners than cats”?
(1) Dogs evolved as pack animals.

(2) The author’s dog jumps up to meet her, while her cat ignores her.
The example of the author’s dog’s attachment to her, (2), illustrates and
supports the generalization that most dogs show greater attachment to their
owners. The specific example helps to show that the statement is based on
experience.
Writers sometimes make the mistake of drawing faulty generalizations
based on too little information. Imagine a person who bites into an apple,
finds a worm, and concludes that all apples have worms in them. Since a
generalization is a broad statement, a valid generalization requires broad
knowledge to justify it. A generalization about American cities is more likely
to be faulty if the writer bases it on only one city but more likely to be valid if
the writer supports it with knowledge of 20 cities. With a larger sample, the
writer is also better able to know whether to qualify a generalization as
something that is true in most, but not all, cases.
▶ Identify one statement with FG for a faulty generalization and the other with
VG for a valid generalization.
(1) Every breed of dog has four legs, so almost all dogs have four legs.
(2) Some dogs bark at kids, so all dogs must dislike or fear children.
You are correct if you chose (1) as the valid generalization: the writer shows
awareness of many different types of dogs. Choice (2) is a faulty
generalization; dogs may bark at children for reasons other than fear or
dislike.

Practice 6.2
Questions 1 through 3 are based on the following newspaper editorial.
OPINION: DOUBTS ABOUT
GLOBAL WARMING
1

Shady Hollow was hit yesterday with record cold temperatures. And
yet, despite this deep freeze, we'll continue to be subjected to the

doctrine of global warming.
2 There is plenty to be said for fuel economy—anyone who lived
through the energy crisis of the 1970s learned that lesson the hard way—
but it’s time we dispense with the terror campaign of doomsday
climatology and recognize it for the pseudoscience that it is. Whenever
Shady Hollow gets a big hit of winter weather, common sense tells us
that the idea of “warming” seems fishy, yet climatologists insist on
playing the same tune. More and more, this tune is taken up by
policymakers and government bodies, who steer our administrations
accordingly. It must be the case that ivory towers have good weather
stripping and excellent heating systems; as for the man on the street, he’s
finding his street a chilly one these days.
3 The simple fact is that it is logically impossible to reconcile a record
cold temperature with the idea that it's getting warmer. A record cold
temperature, and this may be worth spelling out, means exactly this: it
has never been colder on this date in recorded history. If “warming”
means what it sounds like it means—that temperatures are rising, not
falling—then there is a real problem here, because that is quite simply
not what is happening.
4 It may take years to get out from under the orthodoxy of the accepted
opinion on climate change, but the facts themselves will not go away.
Sooner or later, we’ll be forced to acknowledge that we’re still bundling
up, and when that happens, we can stop building policy discussions
around fictions.
1. What is a generalization that is made in paragraph 3?
A. Shady Hollow has the coldest temperatures in the region.
B. Global warming can only be valid if it predicts high temperatures.
C. On the whole, temperatures are not rising.
D. If children are taught a simpler theory, then a more complex theory
should be set aside.
2. What evidence does the author give to support his generalization about
global warming?
A. Shady Hollow was hit with a record cold temperature yesterday.

B. Ivory towers have good weather stripping.
C. It may take years to change opinions on climate change.
D. There is plenty to be said for fuel economy.
3. Which of the following pieces of information would put the author in a
better position to make a generalization about climate change?
A. an account of the energy crisis of the 1970s
B. minutes of policy discussions from the 1970s through today
C. interviews with the “man on the street” from the 1990s through today
D. nationwide data tables of temperatures from the 1980s through today
Answers and explanations start on page 646.

Lesson 7: Word Choice
Key Ideas
Writers choose words carefully to make an impact on the reader.
They deliberately choose words with positive, negative, or neutral
connotations.
Writers also use figurative language such as similes, metaphors, and
personification to enhance descriptions.

Writers make careful decisions to select words that will impact their
audience. One choice that writers make is to select words that have a
connotation associated with a particular image or feeling. Think of the
different connotations of dog, mutt, and man’s best friend. The word dog has
a neutral connotation; it just describes the animal. To some, the word mutt
would have a negative connotation, and the phrase man’s best friend would
have a positive connotation.
▶ Assign a P (positive) or an N (negative) to the following words to indicate

the connotation that might be associated with them:
(1) shack
(2) villa
You are correct if you assigned an N to (1) and a P to (2). The word shack
probably brings to mind a small, poorly built or run-down building. On the
other hand, the word villa might be associated with a house in the countryside
or a vacation destination.
Writers use figurative language to make their descriptions clearer and more
vivid. They use similes, which use the words like or as to compare two
things; for example, “His voice was like velvet.” This indicates that his voice
was smooth. Another type of figurative language is a metaphor, which
implies a comparison between two things. One familiar metaphor is “Life is a
journey”; this compares two dissimilar things in order to describe life. A third
figure of speech is personification, by which a writer assigns human
characteristics to something that is not human. For example, a writer may
describe a storm as “slashing at the windows and knocking on the door.”

GED® TEST TIP
Read closely to see how a writer’s word choice affects how you
picture something or feel about it. You may have to answer
questions that require an awareness of the impact of both
words’ connotations and figurative language.
If you look very carefully, you can find the island of Ascension on a
map about midway between Angola, in Africa, and Brazil, in South
America. This South Atlantic island has a population of about 1,000
people and is home to an important GPS ground antenna and a British
air force base. Its volcanic terrain greets visitors with a forbidding
aspect; place names like “Comfortless Cove” indicate how rocky and
uninviting Ascension Island may appear. Even so, with its dry
subtropical weather, excellent sport fishing, and unique wildlife, this

barren outpost attracts about 1,000 tourists each year.
▶ What does the personification in the third sentence suggest about Ascension
Island?
(1) Tourists are forbidden to visit the island.
(2) The island doesn’t look like a good place to visit.
You are correct if you chose (2). The writer refers to the island as if it were a
person with an unfriendly appearance. Since the last sentence states that
tourists do visit the island, you know that they are not forbidden to do so.

Practice 7
Questions 1 through 5 refer to the following product description.
A COOL NEW BLANKET
1

Many people rely on electric blankets to keep warm on winter nights
without turning on expensive central heating. In summer, though, there’s
no alternative to noisy fans and energy-hogging air conditioners if you
want to stay cool . . . until now. The Starlight company recently
introduced its newest product: an electric blanket that keeps you cool
even on sweltering summer nights.
2 The CoolForter blanket works like an electric blanket, but it feels like
a dream. The blanket contains a full tenth of a mile of flexible hose, fully
insulated between layers of soft cotton. A small, quiet compressor
refrigerates the safely enclosed cooling chemical and circulates it
continuously through the coils. The CoolForter coddles you in refreshing
comfort, and you never have to worry about waking up shivering. That’s
because your sleeping temperature is precisely controlled by the built-in
thermostat, which can be adjusted to your exact temperature preference.
3 Your CoolForter blanket also matches your decorating preferences:
the replaceable cover comes in a wide variety of bland colors to suit any
décor. If you decide to redecorate, choose from a selection of fun and
gaudy prints to liven up your room.

4

Best of all, the CoolForter saves you money every time you use it.
Consuming an average of just 80 watts, the twin-size blanket is like a
regular household lightbulb, costing just pennies per day to run. It’s an
investment in comfort that will pay for itself many times over the
lifetime of its generous ten-year warranty and beyond.

1. In paragraph 2, what is compared to a dream?
A. an electric blanket
B. the flexible hose used in the CoolForter blanket
C. the cotton insulating layers
D. the CoolForter blanket
2. What could be a reason that the writer used the word “coddles” in
paragraph 2?
A. to show that the blanket keeps its user warm
B. to show that the blanket is a pleasant
indulgence
C. to show that the blanket keeps its user cool
D. to show that the user can wrap herself up in the blanket
3. What word could the writer have used instead of “chemical” in paragraph
2 that would have a less negative connotation?
A. fluid
B. antifreeze
C. contaminant
D. water
4. Which word in paragraph 3 means “neutral” but has a negative
connotation?
A. decorating
B. replaceable
C. bland
D. gaudy

5. Why is “like a regular household lightbulb” from paragraph 4 an effective
use of a comparison using figurative language?
A. It reminds the consumer that, while a
lightbulb generates heat, the CoolForter blanket keeps its user cool.
B. It makes the CoolForter blanket seem ordinary.
C. It emphasizes the difference in cost between running a regular
lightbulb and operating a compact fluorescent lightbulb.
D. It allows the consumer to compare the
CoolForter’s energy usage to that of a familiar item.
Answers and explanations start on page 646.

Lesson 8: Writer’s Tone and Point of View
Key Ideas
The writer’s attitude toward a subject is conveyed by the tone of the
writing.
To determine tone, look at word choice and manner of expression.
How would the writer sound reading the piece?
The writer’s point of view is the position she is writing from.

Tone
A writer usually has a certain attitude toward the subject he or she is writing
about. This attitude is the tone of the piece. The tone is not directly stated.
You have to sense it by the writer’s choice of words and manner of
expression.
As you read this drama review, ask yourself, “What tone of voice would the
author have if she were reading this aloud to me?”

Watching actor Brian Dennehy as Willy Loman in the stage
production of Death of a Salesman was transforming. I know
intellectually that live theater is better than movies. Movie actors
reshoot scenes until they are perfect. An actor on stage has one chance
to get it right. It is immediate. The actors are breathing human beings
in the same room with you. Theater provides the opportunity for
strong emotions to surface, right there, in the moment. Seeing a play
often envelops me in energy.
But I’ve never gone so far as to cry at a theater performance until
now. I cried because Dennehy’s Loman reminded me of my father, of
the brevity of our lives, of how easy it is to waste our lives. This was
not an intellectual response. I suddenly heard what this man on stage
was saying—his life wasn’t worth living, though he had tried hard,
had a devoted wife and two sons. It didn’t matter that this play was
written in the 1940s. Mr. Dennehy stood on stage and roared at us
about our lives now. It was hard-hitting, emotional drama.

GED® TEST TIP
Some kinds of tone you might see in GED® passages are
formal or informal, positive or negative, objective, sarcastic,
arrogant, concerned, affectionate, or nostalgic.
▶ Which of the following best describes the tone of this piece?
(1) positive and somewhat awed
(2) cool and objective
The correct response is (1). The writer states positive opinions. She also
chooses short, clipped expressions—“It is immediate” and “right there, in the
moment”—that by themselves create a sense of drama and awe. If the tone
were cool and objective, you would not sense the writer’s emotional attitude
toward the play.

Point of View
The point of view of a piece is “where the author is coming from”—that is,
the writer’s background and experiences that may affect her opinions. For
example, when you read a column in a newspaper, you can usually tell
whether the writer has a liberal or a conservative point of view.
▶ What point of view does the writer of the review above have?
(1) that of a person who prefers sitting at home watching TV
(2) that of an enthusiastic theatergoer
You are correct if you chose (2). You can conclude that the writer goes to the
theater (“Seeing a play often envelops me”) and enjoys it (“theater is better
than movies”). Knowing this helps you evaluate the merits of the review.

Practice 8
Questions 1 through 5 refer to the following review.
EXCErPTed FROM “TALKING BACK TO THE TUBE”
CBS delivered a television low mark called Big Brother. Focusing on
ten fame-seeking, people-pleasing, hair-teasing losers willing to submit
to surveillance by a nation of snoops for three months, it was so bad that
it wasn’t even good. Forget about camp reversals that transform trash
into the perversely fascinating, forget about the Cheese Factor, which
allows a pop-cultural product to be moldy and musty and stinky and still
taste good. Big Brother was so bad that even Jean-Paul Sartre would
have yawned, and the dude wrote hundreds of pages about useless
passion in Being and Nothingness.
2 But something good did come of Big Brother, something wicked and
warped and witty, something created by people with way too much time
on their hands and way too much venom in their bite. While the reality
series was channeling banality through the cable cords and over the
airwaves six nights a week, a small crew of writers were deconstructing
1

and eviscerating the tedium on the Internet. They were taking hours and
hours of prime-time dross and turning it into decadent, amoral, sharp,
electronic gold.
3 Internet sass.
4 You gotta love it, if only because it keeps razor-tongued fanatics and
uncensored savants off the streets and out of trouble.
5 Not only was there a site devoted entirely to the ridiculing of CBS,
Big Brother, its ten cast members, their families, host Julie Chen, and the
gaseous Big Brother house pug, but a number of other general interest
sites, notably Salon.com, spent the summer providing wry daily updates
on the non-goings-on of the non-people in the non-house. They, too,
took the non-pulse of a DOA television series and gave it a semblance of
life on the Internet.
Excerpt from “Talking Back to the Tube,” by Matthew Gilbert. Reprinted courtesy of the Boston
Globe.

1. Who are referred to as “razor-tongued fanatics and uncensored savants”
(paragraph 4)?
A. the television writers
B. the television cast of Big Brother
C. the Internet writers
D. the Internet audience
2. Which of the following best summarizes the reviewer’s point about Big
Brother?
A. The Internet reviews were much more interesting than the TV show.
B. The TV show was so bad that it was funny.
C. Internet writers are better than TV writers.
D. The main problem was with the ten people on the TV show.
3. What opinion is supported by the statement “even Jean-Paul Sartre would
have yawned, and the dude wrote hundreds of pages about useless
passion” (paragraph 1)?

A. The show was boring.
B. The show should have been longer.
C. The show needed more passion.
D. The show was incomprehensible.
4. Which of the following best describes the tone of this review?
A. apologetic
B. nostalgic for earlier shows
C. informal and hip
D. objective
5. From whose point of view is this piece likely written?
A. a television script writer
B. a person who hates watching TV
C. someone knowledgeable about the media
D. a disgruntled fan
Answers and explanations start on page 646.

Lesson 9: Text Structure
Key Ideas
Writers may use different text structures depending on what they are
writing about.
One of the main tools writers use to create different text structures is
transition words, which create relationships between ideas.

Writers make choices about how to organize informational and nonfiction
materials based on their purpose. You have already seen two text structures:
cause and effect, which shows how one thing made another happen, and

compare and contrast, which illustrates similarities and differences.
There are other text structures often used for informational text:
Example—introduces an unfamiliar topic and then follows with
common examples to aid understanding.
Pros and Cons—explains a situation by first presenting its benefits and
then portraying its deficiencies in order to present both sides.
Chronological Order or Process—presents details in the order in
which they occur; also referred to as a sequence of events.
Elaboration—makes a statement and indicates that additional
information or an explanation will follow.

GED® TEST TIP
You will need to be aware of different types of text structure to
answer questions, but you will not need to identify any
structures by their names.
These text structures use different types of transitions to guide the reader
from one idea to the next. Many of these are familiar to you.
Text Structure

Purpose

Sample Transitions

Example

Organizes illustrations
that support a concept

for example, for instance,
such as, to illustrate

Pros and Cons

Shows benefits and
drawbacks

on the one hand, on the
other hand

Chronological
Order or Process

Describes events and
procedures

before, after, next,
following, meanwhile,
until

Elaboration

Expands with additional
details

additionally, furthermore,
moreover

Practice using an understanding of text structure by reading the paragraph
and answering the question below.
Today, there are millions of workers who are not employees in the
traditional sense; they are called “contract workers.” These are selfemployed individuals who have contracts with different businesses.
For example, a graphic artist may have several different clients and
design a newsletter for one and a website for another. Contract
workers pay for their own equipment, supplies, and benefits—such as
health insurance.
▶ What is an example that explains the concept of “contract workers”?
(1) They are not employees in the traditional sense.
(2) They may have contracts with several businesses.
Choice (2) illustrates the concept of contract workers by explaining that they
have several different clients rather than one employer. Choice (1) is not an
example that helps to explain contract work; it just explains what contract
workers are not.

Practice 9
Questions 1 and 2 refer to this scientific experiment.
COWPOX, SMALLPOX, AND IMMUNITY
In 1796, British physician Edward Jenner conducted an experiment
intended to help develop a viable treatment for the deadly smallpox disease.
Some time before, he had noticed that dairymaids in his village commonly
became infected with cowpox. Cowpox is an illness that is very similar to
smallpox, but it is not deadly. The dairymaids who caught cowpox later
turned out to be immune to smallpox. This led Jenner to experiment with
whether he could make a test subject immune to smallpox by first infecting
that person with cowpox. His test subject was a young boy named James.
First, Jenner made small cuts on James’s skin and inserted liquid from the
cowpox sores of a local dairymaid. After being exposed to the disease, James

caught cowpox and later recovered. After the boy’s recovery from cowpox,
Jenner exposed James to smallpox and found that the boy was immune.
Today, scientists and medical professionals know that the cowpox and
smallpox viruses are so similar that the body’s immune system cannot tell
them apart.
1. What step in the process came before James’s recovery from cowpox?
A. his immunity to smallpox
B. exposure to the cowpox disease
C. scientists’ discovery that cowpox and smallpox are similar
D. Jenner exposing James to smallpox
2. Which of the following phrases from the passage provides information
about the order of the steps in the process?
A. “cannot tell them apart”
B. “Jenner made small cuts”
C. “After being exposed to the disease”
D. “make a test subject immune”
Question 3 refers to this discussion of gardening.
THE UPS AND DOWNS OF GARDENING
Planting and maintaining a backyard garden can have many benefits, but it
also brings challenges. On the one hand, successful gardeners often express
deep feelings of accomplishment and satisfaction in their gardens. Gardening
can involve good exercise and fresh air, and spending time outdoors can be a
healthy escape from everyday responsibilities and concerns. A flower garden
provides a beautiful view that often attracts delightful visitors, including
butterflies and hummingbirds. A vegetable garden provides nutritious food
and can add up to significant savings on your grocery bill. An herb garden
can supply alternatives to unhealthy ingredients such as salt and oil.
On the other hand, planting and maintaining a garden can be very
expensive and time-consuming, and a garden may fail despite your best
efforts. Proper soil and fertilizers must be bought, and plants or seeds must be

chosen. It is also important to consider the watering and feeding of the garden
to ensure proper growth. A number of factors beyond your immediate control
may affect the success of your garden. If the season’s weather is extreme in
any way—too dry, too rainy, too hot, or too cold—it can damage tender
plants and undo your hard work, wasting your investment of time and money.
Similarly, invasive pests and diseases can be devastating to your home
garden and can be difficult and expensive to control.
3. Which of the following is one of the writer’s arguments against planting
and maintaining a backyard garden?
A. Time outdoors often alleviates stress.
B. A number of factors can damage a garden.
C. Having too many daily chores is stressful.
D. Rain is bad for a garden.
Answers and explanations start on page 646.

Interpreting Nonfiction and Informational
Text Practice Questions
Questions 1 through 4 refer to the following excerpt from an
autobiography.
EXCERPTED FROM THE LIAR’S CLUB
1

That fall my school career didn’t go much better. I got suspended
from my second-grade class twice, first for biting a kid named Phyllis
who wasn’t, to my mind, getting her scissors out fast enough to comply
with the teacher, then again for breaking my plastic ruler over the head
of a boy named Sammy Joe Tyler, whom I adored. A pale blue knot rose
through the blond stubble of his crew cut. Both times I got sent to the
principal, a handsome ex-football coach named Frank Doleman who let
Lecia and me call him Uncle Frank. (Lecia and I had impressed Uncle
Frank by both learning to read pretty much without instruction before we

were three. Mother took us each down to his office in turn, and we each
dutifully read the front page of the day’s paper out loud to him, so he
could be sure it wasn’t just some story we’d memorized.)
2 He let me stay in his office playing chess all afternoon with whoever
wandered in. He loved pitting me against particularly lunkheaded fifthand sixth-grade boys who’d been sent down for paddlings they never
got. He’d try to use my whipping them at chess to make them nervous
about how dumb they were. “Now this little bitty old second-grader here
took you clean in six plays. Don’t you reckon you need to be listening to
Miss Vilimez instead of cutting up?” When Mrs. Hess led me solemnly
down the hall to Frank Doleman’s office, I would pretend to cry, but
thought instead about Brer Rabbit as he was being thrown into the briar
patch where he’d been born and raised, and screaming Please don’t
throw me in that briar patch!
From The Liar’s Club by Mary Karr, New York: Penguin Books, 1995.

1. If the writer had attended an elementary school dance, which of the
following might she have done?
A. made fun of everyone as they danced
B. sat and played chess with the boys
C. been too shy to dance with anyone
D. hit a boy in the arm to get his attention
2. What is meant by the statement “I . . . thought instead about Brer Rabbit as
he was being thrown into the briar patch where he’d been born and raised
and screaming Please don’t throw me in that briar patch!” (paragraph 2)?
A. She was so upset that she wanted to scream.
B. She was just pretending she didn’t want to go to the principal’s office.
C. She hoped the teacher would let her back in class if she pleaded with
her.
D. She was afraid of what would happen in the principal’s office.
3. What type of principal was Frank Doleman?
A. strict

B. ineffective
C. unusual
D. mean
4. Later in the autobiography, the narrator describes herself as “small-boned
and skinny, but more than able to make up for that.”
Based on this description and the excerpt, which of the following best
describes the narrator?
A. confident
B. serious
C. friendly
D. hopeful
Questions 5 through 9 refer to this article about soda.
TURNING BACK A SUGARY TIDE
1

The popular soft drinks known as soda, pop, or both trace their origins
all the way back to 1767, when English chemist Joseph Priestley
invented a method for carbonating water. Over the last two and a half
centuries, soda has risen to prominence primarily as a sweet beverage for
social occasions. By the mid-1990s, soda had become the beverage of
choice for adolescents. This increase in consumption has not been
without negative consequences. Since the early 1980s, obesity rates for
young Americans have risen steadily, as has the incidence of juvenile
diabetes, heart disease, and myriad other ailments related to poor diet.
2 To counteract the harmful effects of overindulging in soda, federal,
state, and local governments have taken steps in recent years. Former
First Lady Michelle Obama promotes healthier diet choices and
campaigns against childhood obesity. Several states now require that
restaurants post calorie information next to all menu items, including
beverages. In a controversial move, former New York City mayor
Michael Bloomberg proposed banning the sale of sodas over 16 ounces
in city eateries. Additionally, many school districts around the country
have banned the sale of soda in school vending machines.

3

These efforts appear to be paying off: latest statistics indicate that the
percentage of teens who consume soda daily has fallen from 75 percent
in the 1990s to 62 percent in 2009. However, most teens who abandon
soda as a daily beverage replace it with other high-sugar choices, such as
juice or energy and sport drinks. While many of these products have
slightly less sugar than soda, the net impact of regular consumption is
likely to be just as damaging in the long term. Regulating the sale of
soda is a step in the right direction, but more can be done to educate
young people about the dangers of a diet overflowing with sugary
beverages.

5. Which of the following best describes the tone of this article?
A. playful but informative
B. pessimistic and sarcastic
C. concerned but hopeful
D. neutral and inquisitive
6. Which of the following best describes the author’s point of view on
reducing consumption of sugared beverages?
A. The sale of soda should be outlawed due to the beverage’s negative
impact on health.
B. Consuming diet soda is healthier than consuming regular soda.
C. A young person’s decision to consume soda is a personal choice that
must be respected.
D. Young people will choose healthier beverages if they are better
educated about the dangers of consumption of sugared beverages.
7. According to paragraph 3, what will likely be the “net impact” of regularly
consuming juice, energy, and sport drinks instead of soda?
A. Teenagers who consume these beverages instead of soda will avoid the
health hazards associated with soda.
B. Soda manufacturers will likely go out of business since fewer
consumers will be purchasing their products.
C. Young people who drink these beverages regularly will eventually

suffer from the same ailments as those who drink soda regularly.
D. Many of the teenagers who drink juice,
energy, and sport drinks will choose healthier food options to
supplement their diets.
8. According to the passage, the author most likely regards the steps to curb
soda consumption described in paragraph 2 as
A. disruptive but essential
B. effective to some extent
C. invasive and extreme
D. well-intentioned but unenforceable
9. In the beginning of paragraph 3, the words “These efforts” refer to which
of the following?
A. creating soda from carbonated water
B. recommending energy and sport drinks
instead of soda
C. reducing excessive consumption of soda
D. increasing educational programs about the effects of soda
Questions 10 through 12 refer to the following business document.
EXCERPTED FROM INDEPENDENT CONSULTANT’S BROCHURE
AND LETTER HANDBOOK BY HERMAN HOLTZ
1

The National Association of Temporary Services (NATS), which
represents the nation’s temporary help employers, testified today before
the House Ways and Means Committee on the employer mandate and
related provisions of the President’s Health Security Act (H.R. 3600).
2 Edward A. Lenz, NATS senior vice president, legal and government
affairs, said that the temporary help industry supports the principle of
universal coverage, but he has serious concerns that the cost of mandates
could weaken the ability of the temporary help industry to act as a “jobs
bridge” to regular, full-time employment.
3 According to Lenz, the temporary help industry has recently “assumed

a new and vital role—by helping to ease the burden on individuals
during the current restructuring of the American work force. Temporary
work offers displaced workers a critical safety net of income, benefits,
and skills training and often provides a bridge back to regular, full-time
employment.”
4 In addition, the Association is concerned that the mandates, as
currently structured, would “also impose enormous administrative
burdens” due to annual temporary employee turnover in the range of 400
to 600 percent. If employer mandates are adopted, Lenz urged Congress
to create a mechanism that relates premium payments to hours worked,
such as a simple payroll tax.
Copyright © 1995. Reprinted by permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

10. Which of the following states one of the main concerns of NATS?
A. NATS won’t be able to offer skills training to temporary employees if
the government mandates coverage.
B. There will be an increase in turnover of temporary employees if the
government mandates coverage.
C. The cost of mandated coverage will lessen the ability of NATS to hire
and supply temporary workers.
D. Restructuring the work force is a burden to all Americans.
11. According to the press release, why have businesses supplying temporary
help become even more necessary?
A. Many workers are losing their jobs and need temporary jobs until they
find permanent work again.
B. There is not enough work for everyone to have a full-time permanent
job.
C. The job turnover rate has gone as high as 400 to 600 percent.
D. More and more workers do not want permanent full-time work.
12. What is the overall purpose of this piece?
A. to stimulate debate over universal health insurance coverage

B. to impress both the Congress and the president
C. to describe various alternatives to mandated coverage
D. to raise awareness of an issue
Questions 13 through 16 refer to the following excerpt from a historical
feminist speech.
EXCERPTED FROM A TREASURY OF THE WORLD’S GREAT
SPEECHES
1

We have met here today to discuss our rights and wrongs, civil and
political, and not, as some have supposed, to go into the detail of social
life alone. We do not propose to petition the legislature to make our
husbands just, generous, and courteous, to seat every man at the head of
a cradle, and to clothe every woman in male attire. None of these points,
however important they may be considered by leading men, will be
touched in this convention. As to their costume, the gentlemen need feel
no fear of our imitating that, for we think it in violation of every
principle of taste, beauty, and dignity; notwithstanding all the contempt
cast upon our loose, flowing garments, we still admire the graceful folds,
and consider our costume far more artistic than theirs. Many of the
nobler sex seem to agree with us in this opinion, for the bishops, priests,
judges, barristers, and lord mayors of the first nation on the globe, and
the Pope of Rome, with his cardinals, too, all wear the loose flowing
robes, thus tacitly acknowledging that the male attire is neither dignified
nor imposing. No, we shall not molest you in your philosophical
experiments with stocks, pants, high-heeled boots, and Russian belts.
Yours be the glory to discover, by personal experience, how long the
kneepan can resist the terrible strapping down which you impose, in how
short time the well-developed muscles of the throat can be reduced to
mere threads by the constant pressure of the stock, how high the heel of
a boot must be to make a short man tall, and how tight the Russian belt
may be drawn and yet have wind enough left to sustain life.
2 But we are assembled to protest against a form of government existing
without the consent of the governed—to declare our right to be free. . . .
From a speech at a woman’s-rights convention by Elizabeth Cady Stanton, as reprinted in A
Treasury of the World’s Great Speeches, edited by Houston Peterson, New York: Simon &

Schuster, 1954, 1965.

13. Which of the following best restates the lines “Yours be the glory to
discover . . . how long the kneepad can resist the terrible strapping down
which you impose” (paragraph 1)?
A. Men do not understand how uncomfortable women’s clothes are.
B. Women will not resort to wearing pants or other restrictive men’s
clothing.
C. Men will only understand women when women dress like them.
D. Men and women will be equal only when they both wear belts and
collars.
14. What is a “stock” (paragraph 1)?
A. a man’s jacket
B. a wooden frame holding a prisoner
C. a loose shirt
D. a cloth worn around the neck
15. If the speaker attended a fancy tea party, which of the following would
she be most likely to do?
A. be on her best behavior
B. speak up about current events
C. treat the hostess like royalty
D. comment on everyone’s clothing
16. Later in the speech, Stanton states that “over
the horns of bigotry and prejudice will be our
way.” Based on this and the excerpt, you can conclude that Stanton is
giving this speech for what reason?
A. Women are fighting for the right to vote.
B. Women are tired of being made to wear dresses.
C. Husbands need to be made just and generous.

D. Many people mistakenly judge others by their appearance.
Answers and explanations start on page 646.

CHAPTER 2

Analyzing Nonfiction and
Informational Text
Lesson 1: Purpose of Text
Key Ideas
Writers have different reasons, or purposes, for writing.
The main purposes for writing are to narrate a story, to inform, to
persuade, and to entertain.

When you read GED® Reasoning through Language Arts passages, it is
important that you comprehend not only what the author is writing about but
also the purpose—the reason why he or she is writing this passage. Authors
of nonfiction passages have one or more of the following purposes:
Narrate—Narrative passages typically recount events chronologically,
that is, in the order in which they happened. Examples include a
person’s life story and hour-by-hour developments in a news story.
Inform—The author seeks to present facts and data to explain a subject,

situation, or idea. Examples include news articles, financial summaries,
and scientific findings.
Persuade—The author seeks to change readers’ minds, and the passage
includes the author’s opinions, recommendations, or conclusions.
Examples are political speeches, newspaper editorials, and
entertainment reviews.
Entertain—Authors writing to entertain are trying to amuse or interest
their readers. Examples include a humorous memoir or articles about
celebrities.
Read the paragraph and answer questions about the writer’s purpose.
According to market research, video game sales—including digital
downloads and apps—in the United States topped $15 billion in 2010.
The most popular game genres were Action (21.7 percent of sales),
Sports (16.3 percent), and Shooter (15.9 percent). Family
Entertainment games accounted for only 9.1 percent of sales.

GED® TEST TIP
As you are reading passages on the test, ask yourself, “Why did
the author write this story, article, or speech?” That will help
you to understand the purpose.
▶ What is the writer’s purpose for this paragraph?
(1) to present facts about video game sales
(2) to convince readers that Family Entertainment games’ sales should be
increased
▶ Imagine there is an additional sentence at the end of the paragraph.
“Because popular games in the Action and Shooter genres may contain
extremely graphic violence, parents must be educated about how to
monitor their children’s purchases and game play.” What would be the
purpose of the revised paragraph about video games?

(1) to entertain readers with an amusing fact about video games
(2) to persuade parents to become more involved in their children’s use of
video games
In the first question, choice (1) is correct because the writer gives facts and
not persuasive information. In the second question, once the information
about violence has been added, choice (2) is correct because the statement
offers a recommendation to persuade, not entertain, parents.

Practice 1
After an explosion damaged critical systems on the spacecraft of the
Apollo 13 mission, the three astronauts aboard were forced to make the
journey back to Earth inside the Lunar Module (LM), the small vessel
originally designed to land on the Moon’s surface. Using the LM as a
“lifeboat” provided the astronauts with enough oxygen and water for the
return trip, but it also introduced a new problem: there was no way to recycle
used air. To solve the problem, engineers back on Earth cataloged all of the
spare parts and detachable pieces inside the Apollo modules. From these,
they prototyped various devices the astronauts might use to make filters to
use inside the LM. The Earth-based engineers talked the astronauts through
the process of constructing and installing the makeshift filters. The engineers’
quick thinking and creativity provided the astronauts with a way to maintain
breathable air throughout their journey back to Earth.
1. The purpose of the paragraph above is to
A. explain how the Lunar Module worked
B. tell how creative engineers saved astronauts
C. inform about the space program’s value
D. convince that engineers are essential workers
Our state should cut all sales taxes on the purchase of new automobiles to
encourage buying new cars. Older cars do not run as cleanly as new vehicles
and, thus, contribute to air pollution. Additionally, older cars are less safe to
operate. One study estimates that last year, as many as 500 deaths or serious

injuries from accidents in our state could have been prevented by the sorts of
safety features that are standard on newer-model cars.
2. The writer most likely includes the fact about preventable deaths or serious
injuries in automobile accidents because it
A. is the conclusion the writer is trying to prove
B. supports the writer’s main recommendation
C. may shock readers into becoming safer drivers
D. will encourage legislators to cut sales taxes
Questions 3 and 4 are based on this passage.
SILK: NOW AND THEN
Modern consumers do not appreciate the historical importance of the fabric
silk. Silk fabric is valued for its smooth texture and shimmering appearance.
It is also highly absorbent, making silk clothing comfortable in both high and
low temperatures. Today, silk fabrics remain somewhat more expensive than
cotton cloth and synthetic textiles, but many would be surprised to learn that
silk was arguably the most important product in Asia and Europe for nearly
1,000 years.
Originally, sericulture—the technology of making silk cloth from
silkworm cocoons—was known only in China. Around 2,000 years ago,
nomads from Central Asia would travel to China to trade horses and other
goods for silk cloth. As these nomads ventured West, silk became known to
people in the Middle East and Europe. Over time, traders established routes
over 4,000 miles long from China to Europe that became known as the Silk
Road. Throughout the ancient and medieval world, silk was the preferred
fabric for the robes of royalty and the very wealthy.
3. This purpose of this passage is to
A. criticize ancient peoples for overvaluing silk
B. explain how silk fabrics are made
C. entertain readers who enjoy historical travel
D. inform about the historical importance of silk

4. How does the information in the second paragraph support the purpose of
the passage?
A. It illustrates why silk remains an expensive product today.
B. It refutes the notion that silk is a valuable product in the modern world.
C. It provides examples of silk’s historical importance in trade and
culture.
D. It compares the value of silk to that of other products from Asia.
Answers and explanations start on page 647.

Lesson 2: Effectiveness of Argument
Key Ideas
An argument is a statement that takes a position.
An argument consists of a conclusion about the issue and supporting
evidence.
Critically reading an argument involves understanding the stated or
implied assumptions behind the claim.

You may think of an argument as being a quarrel between people. However,
in reading and writing, an argument consists of the following:
A statement, which is a conclusion about something
The evidence, which is support that is given for the argument
The premises (and unstated premises, called assumptions) behind the
argument
Writers should provide supporting evidence for their argument; otherwise,
they are just making an unsupported claim. Sometimes writers clearly state
the premises behind their argument, but in other cases, you may need to read
carefully to infer their assumptions.

Read the argument below and answer the questions that follow.
In the past few years, the majority of state governments have passed
laws making it illegal to send text messages while driving. These laws
are clearly a good decision for which legislators should be praised.
Drivers are 23 times more likely to have accidents while texting than
they are while driving undistracted. It is common sense that the
government has a responsibility to protect its citizens from the
recklessness of a careless few.

GED® TEST TIP
On some passages, writers may use terms such as “for these
reasons,” “it follows that,” or “therefore” to indicate their
conclusion. In other cases, you may have to carefully analyze
the passage to find the argument.
1. What is the writer’s argument about anti-texting laws?
(1) Such laws are a good idea because drivers are prone to accidents while
texting.
(2) The majority of state governments have passed laws making it illegal to
text while driving.
2. What evidence is given in support of the author’s argument?
(1) Drivers are 23 times more prone to accidents while texting.
(2) Members of state legislatures should be praised.
3. Which of the following is likely one of the author’s unstated premises?
(1) Drivers must police themselves to avoid dangerous situations.
(2) A state government has a responsibility to ensure citizens’ safety.
The answer to Question 1 is (1). The author’s opinion is that anti-texting laws

are “good” and “should be praised.” The rest of the argument supports that
opinion. The answer to Question 2 is (1). A statistic such as “23 times more
likely” is typical of the factual evidence you can expect to see on the GED®
Test. The answer to Question 3 is (2). We know that the assumption that
governments should protect citizens is a premise of the author because he
praises legislators for passing these laws to make roads and highways safer.

Practice 2
Questions 1 through 4 refer to this passage about the minimum wage.
MAKING MINIMUM WAGE WORK
FOR WORKERS
1

The minimum wage is the lowest salary that a company can legally
pay its employees. The federal minimum wage is the lowest allowed in
the nation, but many states have set minimum wages higher than the
national number.
2 Several states have taken the sensible step of automatically raising
their minimum wage to adjust for inflation and consumer price increases.
This policy ensures that low-paid workers are paid a stable, livable
income over the long term. Raising the federal minimum wage, however,
requires direct action by lawmakers. As a result, over the past 40 years,
the federal minimum wage has not kept pace with the rate of inflation.
Nowadays, full-time minimum-wage workers earn so little money that
many have fallen below the poverty line. In the case of the minimum
wage, the federal government should follow the lead of the states.
Congress needs to establish automatic wage increases triggered by
increases in inflation and changes to the consumer price index. That is
the only way to ensure sustainable earnings for hardworking citizens.
1. Which of the following is the main point of the passage?
A. States’ minimum wages differ from the federal minimum wage.
B. The federal government should automatically raise the minimum wage
to match price increases.

C. The federal minimum wage ensures a
comfortable living for people earning it.
D. State minimum wages are the result of
political games played with people’s
livelihoods.
2. What is the writer’s argument about states that automatically raise their
minimum wages?
A. Those states’ wages have not kept pace with the rate of inflation.
B. People earning more than minimum wage in those states are wealthy.
C. Those states have many workers in poverty.
D. Those states have systems superior to the federal system of manual
increases.
3. What evidence is given to support the author’s argument?
A. Some states have minimum wages lower than the federal minimum
wage.
B. The federal government should adjust its minimum wage
automatically.
C. Over the past 40 years, the federal minimum wage has not kept pace
with inflation.
D. As a result of inflation, $1 in 1972 was worth more than $5 is worth
today.
4. Which of the following is most likely to be one of the author’s
assumptions?
A. Employees under the age of 18 might be paid less than the minimum
wage.
B. Ensuring sustainable incomes for hardworking citizens is a
responsibility of lawmakers.
C. Employees earning the federal minimum wage cannot support
themselves and their families.
D. The past 40 years have experienced significantly higher inflation than
was expected.

Answers and explanations start on page 647.

Lesson 3: Validity of Arguments
Key Ideas
An argument may or may not be valid.
For the argument to be valid, it needs to be supported by relevant and
provable evidence.
Critical thinking requires questioning both the method of argument
and the source of supporting evidence.

Just because a writer makes an argument does not mean you have to accept it
as valid, or convincing. You need to analyze the supporting evidence. Below
are some types of support for arguments and ways that you can question
their legitimacy.

GED® TEST TIP
When you are reading a writer’s argument, don’t evaluate it
based on what you already believe. Think critically about
whether or not the writer adequately and validly supports the
argument.
Type of
Support

Description

Questions to Ask

Facts

Objective facts that
can be tested or
measured

Is the information complete, or is it
partial or selectively chosen?

Data or

Numerical data that

Do the numbers accurately represent

Statistics

have been gathered or
sampled

the subject? How were they
gathered?

Examples Stories to demonstrate Are the stories true? Are they
or
the “truth”
relevant?
Anecdotes
Authority Testimonials from a
recognized authority
Causality

Assertions that one
thing caused another

Does the person really know the
issue, or is he or she a spokesperson
or celebrity?
Is this really a cause, or is it just a
related factor?

In addition to analyzing the evidence, you need to be aware that sometimes
writers use emotional appeals based on fear, pity, or getting you to “jump on
the bandwagon.”
Gasoline prices spiked suddenly in the Weston metropolitan area last
week when the local oil refinery went offline due to a facility-wide
computer malfunction. Shortly thereafter, the average number of
miles driven daily by Weston residents fell by a whopping 55 percent.
Clearly, the higher gas prices were responsible for the decline in miles
driven.
▶ What is the argument in the paragraph?
(1) Higher gas prices were responsible for the decline in miles driven.
(2) The spike in gas prices was due to a computer malfunction at the local
refinery.
▶ Which of the following undermines the writer’s argument?
(1) Oil refineries have stopped production in the past.
(2) Last week, a blizzard struck the Weston area, causing a state of
emergency that required all nonemergency vehicles to stay off the
roads.
For the first question, choice (1) is correct. The writer concludes that high gas
prices caused the decline in driving and uses the background about the

refinery shutdown as support. For the second question, choice (2) is correct.
The writer’s argument is faulty because she assumes that the high price of
gasoline was the only cause of the reduction in driving. Choice (2) supplies
another reasonable explanation for the reduced driving, thereby weakening
the argument.

Practice 3
Questions 1 through 4 refer to this passage about voting technology.
VOTING SYSTEMS IN THE U.S.
1

The large-scale adoption in 1996 of direct-recording electronic (DRE)
voting was proclaimed as the beginning of an era of superior voting
technology. For as long as elections have been held, voting systems have
been flawed in various ways. In mid-18th century America, voters called
out their selections publicly. This assured an accurate count but meant
voting could not be private. Paper ballots, on the other hand, were
anonymous but could be easily forged or miscounted.
2 The next innovation was the mechanical-lever voting machine,
introduced in the late 19th century. The use of this voting system peaked
in the 1960s. Over the next several decades, the mechanical-lever
machines were replaced by two early electronic voting systems: bubble
sheets recorded by optical scanner and punch cards processed
electronically. All of these systems were prone to glitches, such as the
notorious “hanging chads” and unreadable ballots in Florida after the
2000 U.S. presidential election.
3 Now, many jurisdictions use all-electronic DRE systems. Every step
of the voting process is electronic: the ballot appears on a screen, the
voter indicates his or her selection via buttons or touchscreen
technology, and results are stored on a memory card. Unfortunately,
some DRE systems are neither maintained nor updated regularly,
creating reliability and security concerns as they continue to age. Despite
their initial fanfare, DRE systems have yet to be proven the most secure
and accurate voting system available.

1. The main point of the passage is that
A. unlike optical-scanning and punch-card voting systems, DRE voting is
completely electronic
B. punch-card voting systems caused a problem in the 2000 presidential
election
C. voting systems have been developed over time to address previous
systems’ flaws
D. elections in America have changed greatly over the years
2. Which of the following statements, if true, is evidence to support the
writer’s argument?
A. When technology changes, voting systems change along with it.
B. DRE voting avoids some problems associated with other voting
systems.
C. Several voting systems have become obsolete because they violated
voters'
privacy.
D. No modern-day election would ever be conducted using a public voice
vote.
3. What evidence is given to support the writer’s argument?
A. Voter’s choices are immediately recorded digitally instead of initially
using a paper ballot.
B. Mechanical-lever voting machines were replaced by other mechanical
voting devices.
C. Punch-card voting involves electronic processing.
D. In the mid-18th century, public votes were popular.
4. Which of the following is an example that strengthens the argument?
A. A local businessowner reported no issues using a DRE system.
B. DRE voting became popular as a result of the 2000 election glitches.
C. In 2018, some DRE voters reported difficulty marking their votes
accurately due to the DRE interface or hardware.

D. Audits of elections that use DRE demonstrate this system is more
accurate than paper ballots.
Answers and explanations start on page 648.

Lesson 4: Text Related by Theme or Topic
Key Ideas
The GED® Test will present two selections on a related topic or
theme.
Some questions will require comprehension and analysis of each
piece on its own.
Other questions will require a synthesis of information from the two
sources.

On the GED® Test, you may need to read related paired passages and
answer questions based on your understanding of both of them. The two texts
will be related by topic (what the passages address) or theme (the writer’s
message about a topic). You will need to understand each passage on its own
and be able to synthesize (blend) information to draw a conclusion.
Below are two paragraphs about the same topic. One is a news story, and the
other is an opinion piece. Read both selections and answer the questions
based on your understanding and analysis of both texts.
News Story
Candy, greasy meals, and high-calorie sodas may be banned in U.S.
elementary and high schools. According to news reports, new standards
proposed by the Department of Agriculture would replace such items as fried
potato chips with baked chips and sugary sodas with lower-calorie sport
drinks. These regulations are a result of a child nutrition law, passed by the
U.S. Congress to combat childhood obesity.

Response Letter
The paper announced that the government will be mandating “healthier food”
in school cafeterias. Doesn’t the government have anything better to do than
to “babysit” our schools? Shouldn’t the schools be focused on improving
education, not monitoring behavior? Where is the research to show that
school meals account for childhood obesity? This is just one more
government intrusion into our personal lives.

GED® TEST TIP
When you answer questions related to two selections, skim the
questions before you read the selections. That way, you can be
thinking about how the test requires you to relate the pieces as
you read them.
▶ What is the topic of both of these selections?
(1) greasy food in school cafeterias
(2) new guidelines for healthy school meals
▶ What information is given in the news story?
(1) The government is “babysitting” our schools.
(2) Certain unhealthy foods may be banned from public schools.
▶ Which relevant argument is made in the response letter?
(1) The new regulations are a good way to help combat childhood obesity.
(2) The new regulations are a poor idea because monitoring student
behavior is not a school’s responsibility.
The correct choice in the first question is (2) because the news story reports
on the regulations while the response letter criticizes them. In the second
question, choice (2) is correct because it summarizes the factual information
in the news story. The correct choice in the third question is (2) because the
writer of the response letter clearly states her opposition to the new

regulations.

Practice 4
Questions 1 through 4 refer to the paired passages below.
Passage 1
The online piracy of digital files is a major problem for the music industry.
From 2004 to 2009, 30 billion songs were downloaded illegally, representing
a loss of billions of dollars of revenue. Recent legislation, along with the
shutdown of certain major file-sharing websites, has begun to stem the tide of
piracy. The organization representing the music and recording industry,
however, reports that the annual harm to the economy from piracy may be as
high as $12.5 billion dollars a year. More must be done.
Passage 2
Online piracy is harmful to the music industry, but not only for the reasons
the industry claims. The financial harm caused by piracy is often
exaggerated. The recording industry’s estimates are based on the prices of
songs and the number of songs downloaded; in reality, a person who illegally
downloaded 10,000 songs would download only a fraction of that number if
forced to pay for each file. As a result, the actual loss of revenue caused by
piracy is certainly much lower than the
industry estimates. However, a fear of piracy has made investors cautious
about signing new, experimental artists. That in itself is a cause for concern
and a reason more needs to be done to halt illegal downloading.
1. The topic of both passages is
A. ways in which industries can exaggerate financial harm
B. examples of recent legislation to protect an industry
C. online piracy of music files
D. the signing of new, experimental musicians

2. The main argument of Passage 1 is that
A. new, experimental artists are necessary for the music industry to
succeed
B. additional action to combat online piracy is warranted because piracy
causes financial losses to the music industry
C. the shutdown of major file-sharing websites was a positive
development because they contributed to $12.5 billion per year in
damages
D. from 2004 to 2009, 30 billion songs were downloaded illegally
3. Which claim in Passage 2 supports the conclusion drawn in Passage 1?
A. Fear of piracy makes it difficult for new, experimental acts to get
signed.
B. Recent legislation has begun to reduce the amount of online music
piracy.
C. A person who downloads music illegally would likely download fewer
songs if he or she had to pay for them.
D. Financial harm from illegal music downloads is often exaggerated.
4. With which of the following statements would the writers of both passages
agree?
A. Online piracy of digital files has a harmful effect on the music
industry.
B. Online piracy of digital files causes serious damage to the economy.
C. The main reason to combat online piracy is to ensure that new,
experimental artists can find investors.
D. Music is important for a healthy society to function properly.
Answers and explanations start on page 648.

Lesson 5: Texts with Opposing Arguments

Key Ideas
The GED® Test may present opposing arguments on the same topic.
Some arguments will reach different conclusions because they use
different types of evidence.
Other opposing pairs of arguments may use the same evidence but
have different underlying assumptions.

You have learned about writers’ arguments and have seen how the GED®
Test requires you to work with two related texts. In some cases, you may read
two selections that have opposing arguments about the same topic. Read the
selections below and think about the authors’ claims, the assumptions or the
thinking behind their positions, and the supporting evidence for each.
Argument
Coal, the source of half the energy in the United States, has been the dirtiest
of all fossil fuels because it creates harmful emissions when burned. Help is
on the way with the development of new “clean coal” technologies that
reduce coal’s environmental impact. These new technologies purify exhaust
gases as coal burns (wet scrubbers) and prevent the formation of harmful
emissions in the first place (low-NOx burners). There is even gasification,
which avoids burning coal altogether.
Opposing Argument
“Clean coal” amounts to just an advertising slogan. Don’t be fooled by claims
about new technologies making coal a clean-burning fuel. The hazards to our
environment start well before that. Coal mining wastes huge amounts of
water—70 to 260 million gallons daily. Today’s mining companies now use
mountaintop removal, instead of traditional mining, to extract coal. Fortynine states have issued fish intake advisories due to high mercury
concentration in water, much of it due to runoff from coal mining.

GED® TEST TIP
When you read two selections with opposing viewpoints,
carefully analyze each writer’s arguments. Don’t let your
opinions on the topic influence how you answer the questions.
▶ What is the topic of both of these selections?
(1) preventing air pollution from coal
(2) the usefulness of “clean coal” technologies
You are right if you picked choice (2). The Argument suggests that “clean
coal” will reduce coal’s environmental impact, while the Opposing Argument
contends that coal will continue to harm the environment.
▶ What type of evidence is provided in the Argument?
(1) statistics demonstrating the effectiveness of “clean coal” technologies
(2) facts about new “clean coal” technologies
Here, choice (2) is correct. The Argument lists and briefly describes the new
technologies.
▶ How does the Opposing Argument confront the underlying assumption of
the Argument?
(1) It points out environmental damage caused by coal before it is burned,
when “clean coal” technologies are not used.
(2) It cites studies showing that “clean coal” technologies are less effective
than their advocates claim they are.
Choice (1) is correct. Impacts from mining, water waste, and mercury runoff
are among the other harms cited in the Opposing Argument.

Practice 5

Questions 1 through 4 refer to the Argument and Opposing Argument
below.
ARGUMENT: Rating Systems for Movies Are Beneficial
In 1968, the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA) replaced the
complicated, morals-based Hays Code with the current, user-friendly MPAA
rating system. This system is designed specifically to help parents decide
whether a movie is appropriate for their child. Every parent in America
knows what G, PG, PG-13, and R mean and can use these ratings to quickly
judge suitability. Moreover, ratings now include descriptions that give even
more information that parents can use to
assess content and make wise movie-viewing decisions for their children.
MPAA ratings take the guesswork out of at least one aspect of parenting!
OPPOSING ARGUMENT: Movie Rating Systems Are a Joke

A movie’s MPAA rating—G, PG, PG-13, or R—is a familiar tag that parents,
in particular, use to make fundamental decisions about family entertainment.
Sadly, the rating system is more a marketing tool for the industry than a
useful guide for parents. Consider that, in the early 1980s, unknowing parents
exposed their children to alarming gore and violence under the PG rating,
prompting the creation of the PG-13 rating. The result is that now, a movie
that includes violence, drug use, gore, and
sexual content can be marketed as a family-friendly PG-13 experience.
Parents are better off finding an unbiased source of realistic reviews than
trusting the MPAA rating system.
1. The topic of both passages is
A. violence in movies
B. good and bad parenting decisions
C. the MPAA movie rating system
D. motion picture marketing strategies
2. Which of the following is the main point of the Argument?
A. The MPAA rating system replaced the Hays Code.

B. The MPAA rating system is a useful tool for parents.
C. Parents should consult a variety of sources before deciding which
movies to allow their children to watch.
D. The G, PG, PG-13, and R ratings are familiar and easy to understand.
3. The writer of the Opposing Argument would agree with which of the
following statements?
A. Parents overreacted to movie content in the 1980s.
B. The PG-13 rating introduced a helpful distinction to the system.
C. Violence and drug use are examples of
family-friendly movie content.
D. The MPAA rating system should not be trusted.
4. Which of the following conclusions could be drawn about the writer of the
Argument?
A. She largely approves of the MPAA rating system as a guideline for
parents.
B. She allows her children to watch movies rated PG but not those rated
PG-13.
C. She is wary of how the MPAA rating system judges violent content in
movies.
D. She believes that the Hays Code was detrimental to the movie industry.
Answers and explanations start on page 648.

Lesson 6: Texts with Related Graphic
Information
Key Ideas
The GED® Test will present some selections with accompanying

graphics.
Read the passage carefully and analyze the graphic.
Evaluate whether each question is based on the text, the graphic, or a
combination of the two.

When you read nonfiction and informational text in a textbook, magazine, or
website, it is often accompanied by a graphic—an illustration, photograph,
or diagram—that helps you to understand the information. On the GED®
Test, you will need to combine information from text and graphics to draw
conclusions and to make observations about how the graphic supports the
information in the text. Practice with the text and graphic below.
“Mayfield” No More? The Changing American Household
Although Leave It to Beaver was a fictional television show, many
advertisements, politicians, and movies still echo its portrayal of the
typical American household of the 1950s: a married couple with
children. A closer look at government statistics shows that it might be
time to retool that image; today, fewer than half of American
households are husband-wife households. In fact, more than a quarter
of American households are now occupied by one person living alone
—a significant group for marketers to target, as those who live alone
are entirely responsible for all household purchases.

Source: U.S. Census Bureau

GED® TEST TIP
When you see that a graphic accompanies a selection, ask
yourself, “Is this graphic providing supporting material, or is it
providing additional information?” If you understand that, you
will be better able to answer the test questions.
▶ What is the topic of the story and the graphic?
(1) the composition of American households
(2) advertising on Leave It to Beaver
If you answered (1), you are correct. The story outlines the current makeup of
American households, and the graphic supplies factual detail.
▶ How does the pie chart support the information in the story?
(1) It provides statistics comparing American households in the 1950s with
American households today.
(2) It confirms the story’s point about current household composition and
provides additional details not discussed in the story.
Choice (2) is correct. The pie chart supplies statistics about husband-wife
households (48.4%) and single-resident households (26.7%) that match the
article’s assertions and show the proportion of Americans living with other
family and with roommates to whom they are not related.

Practice 6
Questions 1 through 3 refer to the following passage and the two figures.
Gerrymandering: An Electoral Advantage
1

The term gerrymander is used to describe the process by which
electoral districts are given curious shapes in order to favor the interests

of the party in power of a state legislature. Through this process, the
governing political party tailors the electoral map to group unfavorable
neighborhoods into a few districts likely to vote for the opposition while
configuring the majority of districts to favor the party in power.
2 Figures 1(a) and 1(b) show how a governing political party can benefit
from gerrymandering. In both figures, there are 40 gray squares and 60
white squares, and the area is divided into four equal-sized districts. In
Figure 1(a), the white-square party will win only two seats out of four,
but in Figure 1(b), the white-square party will take three of the four
districts, as most of the gray votes are consolidated into one oddly
shaped and
geographically divided district. In fact, Illinois’s 4th Congressional
District is similar in shape to the gray district in Figure 1(b).

1. Which of the following is the main point of the passage and figures?
A. Illinois’s 4th Congressional District has now been in existence for over
200 years.
B. Curiosity is the most important ingredient in the democratic process.
C. Gerrymandered congressional districts are a major threat to the
democratic system.
D. Governing parties can use their power to shape electoral districts to
their advantage.
2. Which of the following conclusions can be drawn from the passage and the
figures?

A. Gerrymandering is more common in Illinois than in other American
states.
B. Through gerrymandering, a governing party can be elected to a greater
number of seats than its voter support might otherwise allow.
C. Through gerrymandering, impartial committees draw boundaries to
keep elections fair.
D. Gerrymandering convinces citizens who would ordinarily be
unfavorable to a party to change their votes.
3. In what way do the figures support the passage?
A. They illustrate the advantages a party can obtain through
gerrymandering.
B. They predict victory for the gray party in the upcoming election.
C. They are more relevant to Chicago than to rural Illinois.
D. They show that voter turnout will continue to decline if governing
parties continue to gerrymander districts.
Answers and explanations start on page 648.

Analyzing Nonfiction and Informational
Text Practice Questions
Questions 1 through 4 refer to the following passage about
communication technology and the accompanying cartoon.
SOCIAL NETWORKING AT WHAT COST?
1

Sit in any restaurant or coffee shop long enough, and you’re bound to
witness a familiar scene: a couple, a family, or a group of friends
gathered to enjoy a meal, but instead of conversing, each person at the
table sits staring at his or her cell phone. In this age of social media, the
question arises: does technology enhance or limit our ability to make
strong emotional connections with other people?

2

Social networks have broadened with the expansion of
communication technology. We connect easily with new acquaintances,
old friends, potential clients, and complete strangers. For loved ones who
are separated by distance, technology provides an important lifeline.
Soldiers, deployed for long tours of duty, meet their newborn children
over video chat. Grandparents, limited by ill health, watch their
grandchildren grow through pictures and videos posted to social media
sites.
3 With all the benefits of social media, however, come considerable
costs. Each new connection we make (and old acquaintance we
maintain) demands time, energy, and emotional investment. This often
comes at the expense of time we could give to the most important people
in our lives. Moreover, much of what we share through social media is
superficial or entertaining. Only when technology is used to enhance our
deepest, most valuable connections can it be considered real progress for
humankind.

1. What is the purpose of the passage and the graphic?
A. to discuss different forms of social media
B. to suggest a new form of communication technology
C. to examine ways in which modern families use technology to
communicate
D. to discuss whether communication technology helps or hurts

relationships
2. What is the topic of the passage and the graphic?
A. maintaining long-distance relationships
B. how technology affects interpersonal connections
C. the limits of social media
D. the expense of new technologies
3. Which of the following details in the graphic supports the author’s point of
view in the passage?
A. The caption reveals that the woman is
expecting friends to visit.
B. The woman in the cartoon is speaking on the phone with a computer
nearby.
C. The woman in the cartoon is alone.
D. The caption reveals that the woman’s friends will use their phones
during their visit.
4. Together, the graphic and the passage support which of the following
conclusions?
A. New communication technologies may offer exciting ways for people
to establish new friendships.
B. New communication technologies may
adversely impact important human relationships.
C. New communication technologies may offer positive solutions for
friends who are separated by distance.
D. New communication technologies may help people to complete several
tasks at once.
Questions 5 through 8 refer to this passage about the giant squid.
THE GIANT SQUID: MORE
THAN COLOSSAL?

1

The giant squid is the world’s longest cephalopod. Based on
measurements of over 100 full specimens (including adult and
adolescent individuals) recovered from the stomachs of sperm whales
and other predators, scientists have determined that the giant squid can
reach a length of 13 meters.
2 Some have argued that the honor of longest cephalopod should instead
go to the colossal squid, a distant relative of the giant squid, but this
belief is incorrect. It is true that the colossal squid may outweigh its
giant cousin. However, of the few specimens of the colossal squid (all of
them juveniles) described in the scientific literature, the longest
measured ten meters. Therefore, the giant squid wins the length contest.
3 No other cephalopod is even close in length to either of these animals.
For example, the giant Pacific octopus, the world’s longest octopus
species, has a maximum arm span of only about six meters. The giant
squid’s status as the world’s longest cephalopod remains uncontested.
5. The main point of the passage is that
A. the colossal squid weighs more than the giant squid
B. the giant squid is the world’s longest cephalopod
C. the giant Pacific octopus is the world’s
longest octopus species
D. the giant squid can reach a length of 13
meters
6. Which of the following best summarizes the writer’s argument in
paragraph 2?
A. The colossal squid is the world’s longest cephalopod.
B. The colossal squid is a distant relative of the giant squid.
C. The giant Pacific octopus is not as long as the giant squid.
D. The giant squid is longer than the colossal squid.
7. What evidence is given to support the writer’s argument in paragraph 2?
A. The colossal squid can weigh more than the giant squid.
B. The giant squid is the world’s longest cephalopod.

C. The length of the longest known colossal squid specimen is ten meters.
D. The giant Pacific octopus has a maximum arm span of only about six
meters.
8. Which of the following is an example of faulty reasoning that weakens the
writer’s argument?
A. The longest known colossal squid is ten meters long, so there is no
colossal squid longer than the longest giant squid.
B. The giant Pacific octopus is the world’s longest species of octopus, but
it is not as long as the giant squid.
C. Many specimens of the giant squid have been measured.
D. Because sperm whales prey on giant squid, they must also prey on
colossal squid.
Questions 9 through 15 refer to these two passages about mercury.
Passage 1
The use of mercury amalgam for dental fillings has already been banned in
several European nations, and it should also be banned in the United States.
The mercury contained in amalgam fillings slowly leaches into the mouth and
is swallowed. It is then absorbed by the small intestine and accumulates in
various body tissues, including the brain, kidney, and liver. In 2001, a study
reported that patients with a higher number of amalgam fillings also had
higher occurrences of cancer, respiratory disease, and diseases of the nervous
system. Therefore, it is clear that this accumulated mercury causes a variety
of health problems.
In addition to its health impact, the mercury released from dental amalgam
has a number of damaging environmental consequences. Mercury waste
produced by dental offices is sometimes directly disposed of into sewage
water or landfills. Mercury can leach from landfills into groundwater and get
into rivers and lakes. It has been estimated, for example, that dental amalgam
is the source of 4 percent of the mercury found in the water of Lake Superior.
Due to the alarming health and environmental consequences of mercury
amalgam, dental fillings should be made from resin composites instead.
These composites are already becoming popular due to their cosmetic appeal,
so banning mercury amalgam will create no consumer backlash. There are

demonstrable advantages (and no disadvantages) to banning mercury dental
amalgam in the United States.
Passage 2
In recent years, uneducated consumers have expressed a growing fear of
the mercury commonly found in dental fillings. The environmental impact of
mercury is serious, and the release of mercury into the environment must be
better controlled. However, the health risks associated with mercury amalgam
fillings are minimal.
It is well known that people who have mercury amalgam fillings absorb
small amounts of mercury. However, most of this mercury is excreted in the
urine. To date, no convincing scientific study has demonstrated that mercury
absorbed from dental fillings causes any serious health problems. Because
mercury amalgam fillings tend to last longer than resin composite fillings,
amalgam is preferable for use whenever there is no cosmetic need for a toothcolored filling.
However, the disposal of mercury amalgam in dental offices absolutely
must be regulated. The Environmental Protection Agency estimates that 40 to
50 percent of the mercury in the wastewater processed at public treatment
plants comes from dental amalgam. This is inexcusable, especially because
devices that remove mercury from wastewater are inexpensive and easy for
dental offices to use. While mercury amalgam should remain available
because it is more durable than composites, every dental office must have a
device to remove mercury from wastewater.
9. The topic of both passages is
A. groundwater contamination
B. mercury dental amalgam
C. resin composite fillings
D. dental health risks
10. What is the main argument of Passage 1?
A. Mercury amalgam fillings are not unhealthy, but their disposal should
be regulated for environmental reasons.
B. Resin composite should replace mercury amalgam for dental fillings
because it tends to last longer.

C. Mercury amalgam fillings should be banned because they are
unhealthy and bad for the environment.
D. Mercury dental amalgam leaches mercury into a patient’s mouth and
can damage the liver.
11. Which statement best describes the supporting evidence in paragraph 3 of
Passage 2?
A. It appears convincing at first glance, but no source is cited.
B. It is a seemingly convincing statistic, but the source is untrustworthy.
C. It is an unconvincing statistic from an
untrustworthy source.
D. It is a convincing statistic from a reliable source.
12. In paragraph 3, the author of Passage 1 states that “These composites are
already becoming popular due to their cosmetic appeal, so banning
mercury amalgam will create no consumer backlash.” Which of the
following is an assumption the author of Passage 1 makes about
consumers?
A. Consumers have no other reason, such as cost or durability, to prefer
mercury amalgam to composite fillings.
B. Consumers will be happy with whatever material they are offered for
dental fillings.
C. Consumers are not generally vocal about their preferences.
D. Consumers never discuss the choice of filling material with their
dentists.
13. The writer of Passage 2 would be most likely to agree with which of the
following statements?
A. Mercury amalgam fillings should be banned because they are
unhealthy.
B. Resin composite fillings look better than mercury amalgam fillings
when each is used on visible tooth surfaces.
C. Mercury contamination of public wastewater is an unimportant issue.
D. Resin composite fillings are preferable to mercury amalgam in all

cases.
14. Which of the passages has weaker supporting evidence and why?
A. Passage 1, because it cites no sources for the study or the statistic it
cites
B. Passage 1, because it argues that mercury should be banned in dental
fillings
C. Passage 2, because it cites the
Environmental Protection Agency as the source of a statistic it cites
D. Passage 2, because it argues that mercury used by dental offices should
be better regulated
15. The information presented in Passage 2 suggests that Passage 1 includes
which of the following examples of faulty reasoning?
A. Resin composites are already gaining in popularity.
B. The use of mercury dental amalgam has already been banned in several
European nations.
C. The mercury released from dental amalgam has damaging
environmental consequences.
D. Mercury that accumulates in body tissues causes a variety of health
problems.
Answers and explanations start on page 649.

CHAPTER 3

Interpreting Fiction
Lesson 1: Plot Elements
Plot refers to the events in a story. Generally, the events are told in order—
what happened first, next, and so on. Understanding the order of events, the
sequence, can help you see which events caused or affected others.

Key Ideas
The plot is the series of events in a story. Understanding the order of
the events helps you see how they are related.
The conflict is a problem between characters, between a character
and nature, or within a character.

A story usually contains at least one conflict, or problem. The conflict may
be between characters, within a character, or between a character and nature.
Conflict creates tension. When it is resolved, the tension ends.
The following excerpt is about a brother and sister whose mother has a
tumor. As you read it, look for the order of events and the conflict.

Robert didn’t phone until evening. His voice was fatigued and thin.
“I’ve moved her to the university hospital,” he said. “They can’t deal
with it at home.”
Kate waited, saying nothing. She concentrated on the toes of her
shoes. They needed shining. You never take care of anything, her
mother would say.
“She has a tumor in her head.” He said it firmly, as though Kate might
challenge him.
“I’ll take a plane tomorrow morning,” Kate answered, “I’ll be there
by noon.”
Robert exhaled. “Look,” he said, “don’t even come back here unless
you can keep your mouth shut and do it my way.”
“Get to the point.”
“The point is they believe she has a malignancy and we’re not going
to tell her. I almost didn’t tell you.” His voice faltered. “They’re going
to operate but if they find what they’re expecting, they don’t think
they can stop it.”
For a moment there was no sound except an oceanic vibration of
distance on the wire. Even that sound grew still. Robert breathed.
Kate could almost see him, in a booth at the hospital, staring straight
ahead at the plastic instructions screwed to the narrow rectangular
body of the telephone. It seemed to her that she was hurtling toward
him.
From “Souvenir” by Jayne Anne Phillips, from Black Tickets, NY: Delacorte
Press, 1979. Reprinted with permission of Jayne Anne Phillips.

GED® TEST TIP

To understand the events and conflict in a story, pay attention
to the dialogue. Remember that every time the speaker changes,
a new paragraph begins.
▶ When did Robert decide not to tell his mother about the tumor?
(1) before talking to Kate
(2) after discussing the issue with Kate
(1) is correct. Robert has already decided what to do when he calls Kate.
▶ Which of the following identifies a conflict in this excerpt?
(1) Kate tells Robert she will fly there tomorrow.
(2) Robert tells Kate that she must do as he says.
(2) is correct. Robert challenges Kate. That creates tension.

Practice 1
Questions 1 through 4 refer to the following excerpt from a short story.
EXCERPTED FROM “THE PIECE OF STRING”
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

The countryman looked at the Mayor in astonishment, already
terrified by this suspicion resting on him without his knowing why.
“Me? Me? I picked up the pocketbook?”
“Yes, you, yourself.”
“On my word of honor, I never heard of it.”
“But you were seen.”
“I was seen, me? Who says he saw me?”
“Monsieur Malandain, the harness-maker.”
The old man remembered, understood, and flushed with anger.
“Ah, he saw me, the clodhopper, he saw me pick up this string, here,
Mayor.” And rummaging in his pocket he drew out the little piece of

string.
10 But the Mayor, incredulous, shook his head.
11 “You will not make me believe, Maître Hauchecorne, that Monsieur
Malandain, who is a man we can believe, mistook this cord for a
pocket-book.”
12 The peasant, furious, lifted his hand, spat at one side to attest his
honor, repeating:
13 “It is nevertheless God’s own truth, the sacred truth. I repeat it on my
soul and my salvation.”
14 The Mayor resumed:
15 “After picking up the object, you stood like a stilt, looking a long
while in the mud to see if any piece of money had fallen out.”
16 The old fellow choked with indignation and fear. . . .
17 He was confronted with Monsieur Malandain, who repeated and
maintained his affirmation. They abused each other for an hour. At his
own request, Maître Hauchecorne was searched. Nothing was found on
him.
18 Finally the Mayor, very much perplexed, discharged him with the
warning that he would consult the Public Prosecutor and ask for further
orders.
From Collected Novels and Stories by Guy de Maupassant, translated by Ernest Boyd,
copyright 1922 and renewed 1950 by Alfred A. Knopf, a division of Random House, Inc. Used
by permission of Alfred A. Knopf, a division of Random House, Inc.

1. What was the peasant doing when he “lifted his hand, spat at one side to
attest his honor” (paragraph 12)?
A. thinking of striking the Mayor
B. swearing that he was telling the truth
C. pleading to the Mayor for mercy
D. performing a peasant ritual
2. How did the peasant react when confronted with Malandain, the harnessmaker?
He

A. became choked with fear and indignation
B. tried to explain what had actually happened
C. became respectful and subdued
D. confronted him and then asked to be searched
3. Which of the following statements best describes the conflict in this
excerpt?
A. A town mayor is abusing his authority.
B. A peasant leads a harsh life and is often at odds with others.
C. A peasant is accused of taking a pocketbook.
D. Someone has lost a pocketbook with a
great deal of money in it.
4. Place the numbers next to the actions to indicate the order in which the
actions occurred in the excerpt.
The peasant and the harness-maker argue.
The peasant explains that he picked up a piece of string, not a
pocketbook.
The mayor issues a warning to the peasant.
The mayor states that the harness-maker witnessed the peasant stealing
the pocketbook.
1.
2.
3.
4.
Answers and explanations start on page 649.

Lesson 2: Inferences
To understand a story, you can’t just rely on what is directly stated. You also
need to “read between the lines,” or make inferences. An inference is based
on information you are given plus what you have learned about the real world
—the way things happen and the way people act.

Key Ideas
To understand a story, you must make inferences.
Making inferences means that you look closely at the details in the
story, think about your knowledge of the real world, and then ask
yourself, “What does this information point to?”

As you read this excerpt from a story, look for suggested meanings behind
people’s actions and words.
“Last night?” The old blue eyes looked blank, then brightened. “Ah
no, I must have taken one of my Seconals. Otherwise I’d have heard it
surely. ‘Auntie,’ my niece always says—‘what if there should be a
fire, and you there sleeping away?’ Do what she says, I do sometimes,
only to hear every pin drop till morning.” She shook her head,
entering the elevator. “Going up?”
“N-no,” said Mrs. Hazlitt. “I—have to wait here for a minute.” She
sat down on the bench, the token bench that she had never seen
anybody sitting on, and watched the car door close on the little figure
still shaking its head, borne upward like a fairy godmother, willing
but unable to oblige. The car’s hum stopped, then its light glowed on
again. Someone else was coming down. . . .
The car door opened. “Wssht!” said Miss Finan, scuttling out again.
“I’ve just remembered. Not last night, but two weeks ago. And once
before that. A scream, you said?”

Mrs. Hazlitt stood up. Almost unable to speak, for the tears that
suddenly wrenched her throat, she described it.
From “The Scream on Fifty-Seventh Street” by Hortense Calisher, from Tales for the Mirror, reprinted
in Women and Fiction, edited by Susan Cahill, New York: New American Library, 1975.

GED® TEST TIP
Do not leave a question unanswered. If you read a tough
question, do your best to think about it, look back at the
passage for information you may need, and then choose the
best answer.
▶ What happened before the beginning of this excerpt?
(1) Mrs. Hazlitt heard a scream the night before and asked Miss Finan if
she heard it too.
(2) Mrs. Hazlitt asked Miss Finan about her health and whether she is
sleeping well.
The correct answer is (1). You can infer it from details such as “Last night?”
and “Not last night, but two weeks ago. And once before that. A scream, you
said?”
▶ What is the most likely reason for the “tears that suddenly wrenched”
Mrs. Hazlitt’s throat?
(1) She was upset at Miss Finan’s inability to remember.
(2) She was relieved that Miss Finan had heard a scream too.
You are correct if you chose (2). Mrs. Hazlitt is so relieved that someone else
heard the scream that she has to fight back tears.

Practice 2

Questions 1 through 4 refer to the following excerpt from a short story.
EXCERPTED FROM “THE STORY OF AN HOUR”
1

[Louise] knew that she would weep again when she saw [her
husband’s] kind, tender hands folded in death; the face that had never
looked save with love upon her, fixed and gray and dead. But she
saw beyond that bitter moment a long procession of years to come that
would belong to her absolutely. And she opened and spread her arms out
to them in welcome.
2 There would be no one to live for during those coming years; she
would live for herself. There would be no powerful will bending her in
that blind persistence with which men and women believe they have a
right to impose a private will upon a fellow creature. A kind intention or
a cruel intention made the act seem no less a crime as she looked upon it
in that brief moment of illumination.
3 And yet she had loved him—sometimes. Often she had not. What did
it matter! What could love, the unsolved mystery, count for in face of
this possession of self-assertion, which she suddenly recognized as the
strongest impulse of her being!
4 “Free! Body and soul free!” she kept whispering . . .
5 Some one was opening the front door with a latchkey. It was [her
husband] Brently Mallard who entered, a little travel-stained,
composedly carrying his grip-sack and umbrella. He had been far from
the scene of accident, and did not even know there had been one. He
stood amazed at [her sister] Josephine’s piercing cry; at Richards’ quick
motion to screen him from the view of his wife.
6 But Richards was too late.
7 When the doctors came they said she had died of heart disease—of
joy that kills.
From “The Story of an Hour” by Kate Chopin.

1. How did Brently Mallard generally feel toward his wife?
He

A. had always loved her
B. kept her at arm’s length
C. liked to play practical jokes on her
D. had cruel intentions toward her
2. Which detail best expresses Louise’s vision of her future?
A. that bitter moment
B. she’d weep again
C. spread her arms out in welcome
D. blind persistence
3. What was the doctors’ meaning when they said that Louise died of “joy
that kills”
(paragraph 7)?
They thought that
A. she was overcome and thrilled to see her husband
B. she was excited about her upcoming life of freedom
C. her heart was worn out from giving so much love
D. her heart was weakened from the strain of living
4. Why did Louise die?
A. She was overcome with relief.
B. She was shocked that she would not be free.
C. She was confused by feelings of love and hate.
D. She thought there would be no one to live for.
Answers and explanations start on page 650.

Lesson 3: Character

Key Ideas
Characters are the people in the story.
You can understand a character by noting what the narrator tells you
directly as well as by inferring from the character’s appearance,
actions, words, and thoughts.

Characters are the people who inhabit a story. The personalities and
motivations of characters are often stated directly by the narrator—the
person telling the story. Sometimes you can also infer characters’
personalities or motivations by what they do, what they think, and what they
say.
As you read this excerpt, look for details that describe each character.
Axel Olsen was going to paint Helga Crane. Not only was he going to
paint her, but he was to accompany her and her aunt on their shopping
expedition. Aunt Katrina was frankly elated. Uncle Poul was also
visibly pleased. Evidently they were not above kow-towing to a lion.
Helga’s own feelings were mixed; she was amused, grateful, and
vexed. It had all been decided and arranged without her, and, also, she
was a little afraid of Olsen. His stupendous arrogance awed her.
The day was an exciting, not easily to be forgotten one. Definitely,
too, it conveyed to Helga her exact status in her new environment. A
decoration. A curio. A peacock. Their progress through the shops was
an event; an event for Copenhagen as well as for Helga Crane. Her
dark, alien appearance was to most people an astonishment. Some
stared surreptitiously, some openly, and some stopped dead in front of
her in order more fully to profit by their stares. “Den Sorte” dropped
freely, audibly, from many lips.
The time came when she grew used to the stares of the population.
And the time came when the population of Copenhagen grew used to
her outlandish presence and ceased to stare. But at the end of that first
day it was with thankfulness that she returned to the sheltering walls

of the house on Maria Kirkplads.
From “Quicksand” by Nella Larsen, in The Norton Anthology of African American
Literature, edited by Henry Louis Gates, Jr., and Nellie Y. McKay, New York: W.W. Norton,
1997.

GED® TEST TIP
A common kind of question asks you to choose how a character
would act in a different situation, based on what you know
about the character’s personality.
▶ Which of the following describes Helga?
(1) attractive, down-to-earth, embarking on a new life
(2) self-centered, smug, enjoys being watched
Choice (1) is correct. An artist is painting her, suggesting she is attractive.
Yet she prefers not to be the center of attention (see the end of the last
paragraph).
▶ Which of the following would Olsen most likely do at a party?
(1) snub the hostess if the wine was below his expectations
(2) offer to drive anyone home who needed a ride
Choice (1) is correct. Apply what you know about people with “stupendous
arrogance” (see the end of the first paragraph) to answer this question.

Practice 3
Questions 1 through 3 refer to the following excerpt from a story.
EXCERPTED FROM ”HIZAKURIGE”
1

“I shall never forget it,” the witch went on. “When you were ill you

gave your sickness to me. Our only child, who had to carry on our
name, grew weak and thin because there was no rice to fill his empty
stomach. Every day the bill collectors were knocking at the door and
the rent remained unpaid. Yet I did not complain—not even when I
slipped in the dogs’ dirt in the lane.”
2
“Don’t talk of it,” said Yaji. “You’ll break my heart.”
3
“And then, when through my labors I had saved enough money to
buy a kimono, I had to pawn it for your sake and never saw it again.
Never again did it come back to me from the pawnbroker’s.”
4
“At the same time you must remember what a pleasant place you are
in now,” said Yaji, “while I have to worry along down here.”
5
“What? What is there pleasant about it? It is true that by the help of
your friends you erected a stone over my grave, but you never go near
it, and you never contribute to the temple to get the priests to say
prayers for my soul. I am nothing to you. The stone over my grave has
been taken away and put into the wall, where all the dogs come and
make water against it. Not a drop of water is ever placed on my grave.
Truly in death we suffer all sorts of troubles.”
6
“True, true,” said Yaji.
7
“But while you thus treat me with neglect,” the witch went on, “lying
in my grave I think of nobody but you and long for the time when you
will join me in the underworld. Shall I come to meet you?”
8
“No, no, don’t do that,” said Yaji. “It’s really too far for you.”
9
“Well then, I have one request to make.”
10 “Yes, yes. What is it?”
11 “Give this witch plenty of money.”
12 “Of course, of course.”
1
“How sad the parting!” cried the witch. “I have yet much to tell you,
countless questions to ask you, but the messenger of Hell recalls me!”
14 Then, recovering from her trance, the witch twanged her bow.
From “Hizakurige” by Jippensha Ikku in The Longwood Introduction to Fiction, Boston: Allyn
and Bacon, 1992.

1. Why does Yaji say, “No, no, don’t do that . . . It’s really too far for you”

(paragraph 8)?
A. He is trying to be more considerate than he had been in the past.
B. He is reluctant to see the ghost of his wife.
C. He has no real interest in seeing his wife again.
D. His wife can’t really travel to him anyway.
2. Which of the following is the best description of the witch?
A. caring
B. unconvincing
C. untrustworthy
D. thoughtful
3. Earlier in the story the witch, speaking as Yaji’s wife, says, “Ah, what
agony I went through when I was married to you—time and again
suffering the pangs of hunger and shivering with cold in the winter.”
Based on this information and the excerpt, what kind of husband did Yaji
seem to be?
A. angry
B. kind-hearted
C. responsible
D. neglectful
Answers and explanations start on page 650.

Lesson 4: Theme
Key Ideas
The subject of a story is what the story is about.
The theme of a story is different from the subject. The theme goes
beyond the subject and often expresses a point of view about life.

Every story has a subject. The subject might be about fighting a war or
growing up in poverty. But there is more to a story than its subject. As a
reader, look for what the author is trying to say about the subject. That is the
theme—the message the author wants the reader to understand. In fiction, the
theme is often a statement about life. For example, the theme might be that
fighting in a war changes a person’s life forever.
The theme may be directly stated. If it is not, you can infer the theme from
the characters’ thoughts and actions and from the things that happen in the
story.
As you read the following excerpt, ask yourself what message about the
people and their lives the author is trying to tell you.
While the boys were getting the Doctor’s horse, he went to the
window to examine the house plants. “What do you do to your
geraniums to keep them blooming all winter, Mary? I never pass this
house that from the road I don’t see your windows full of flowers.”
She snapped off a dark red one, and a ruffled new green leaf, and put
them in his buttonhole. “There, that looks better. You look too solemn
for a young man, Ed. Why don’t you git married? I’m worried about
you. . . .”
Sometimes the Doctor heard the gossipers in the drugstore wondering
why Rosicky didn’t get on faster. He was industrious, and so were his
boys, but they were rather free and easy, weren’t pushers, and they didn’t always show good judgment. They were comfortable, they
were out of debt, but they didn’t get much ahead. Maybe, Doctor
Burleigh reflected, people as generous and warmhearted and
affectionate as the Rosickys never got ahead much; maybe you
couldn’t enjoy your life and put it into the bank, too.
From “Neighbor Rosicky” by Willa Cather, from Obscure Destinies.

GED® TEST TIP
Read the whole passage carefully but not too slowly before you
begin to answer the questions. If you read a question that really
stumps you, skip it and go on. You can come back to it.
▶ Which of the following statements is the theme of the story?
(1) A good life is measured in terms of love, not money.
(2) People should not gossip about others.
You are correct if you chose (1). Doctor Burleigh’s thoughts at the end of the
excerpt help you understand that this is the author’s main message.
▶ Which of the following details supports the theme?
(1) Mary Rosicky lovingly “worries” about the doctor.
(2) The Rosickys keep out of debt.
Again, you are correct if you chose (1). The flowers Mary grows, the fact that
she snaps off one to give the doctor, and her expressed concern for him all
show her warmth and happiness. They help support the theme that the doctor
reflects on.

Practice 4
Questions 1 through 5 refer to the following excerpt from a short story.
EXCERPTED FROM ”GONE FISHIN’”
1

Early morning is the best time. You’re fully rested but not awake
enough to remember how hard it all is. Morning is like being a child
again, and morning before the sun is out is like those magic times that
you hid under the bed and in between the clothes hanging in your
mother’s closet. Times when any kind of miracle could come about just

as normal as a spider making her web.
2 I remember waking up in the dark once when I was very small. I
jumped right out of bed and went up next to the screen door on the back
porch to see what kind of fantastic thing was going on outside. At first I
couldn’t see anything but there was a clopping sound, nickering, and a
deep voice that made me feel calm and wondering. Slowly, coming out
from the darkness, I saw a gray shimmering next to a tall black pillar.
The shimmer turned into a big horse and the pillar became my father
holding out an apple and cooing in his bass voice, “Ho! Yeah, boy,”
even though the horse was tame and eating from his hand.
3 I drifted into sleep thinking that we were poor and didn’t own a horse.
When I woke up it was light and there was no horse to be seen. I asked
my father about it but he told me that I was dreaming—where were poor
people like us going to find big gray stallions?
4 But there were horse chips behind the barn and hoofprints too.
5 I decided that it was a magic horse and man that I’d seen. From that
day on I believed that magic hides in the early morning. If you get up
early enough you might find something so beautiful that it would be all
right if you just died right then because nothing else in life could ever be
better.
From “Gone Fishin’” by Walter Mosley, Baltimore: Black Classic Press, 1997.

1. In the story, the boy ___________ after hearing his father’s explanation.
A. feels confused
B. finds a new explanation
C. no longer trusts his father
D. tries to convince his father
2. Which of the following is the best description of the boy?
A. hard-hearted
B. imaginative
C. skeptical
D. chatty

3. What is the most likely reason the boy decides he saw a magic horse and
man?
A. He wants to reconcile what he saw with what his father told him.
B. He enjoys magic and likes to make up stories.
C. He wants to prove his father was mistaken.
D. This kind of miracle can happen.
4. Which of the following would the father probably enjoy most?
A. daydreaming about the future
B. having enough money to pay some bills
C. keeping his son’s hopes up about getting a new bicycle for his birthday
D. sharing ghost stories around a campfire
5. Which of the following statements fits the theme of this story?
A. False hopes will not get you anywhere.
B. Dreams really can come true.
C. Adults cannot see what children see.
D. Morning and youth are full of possibility.
Answers and explanations start on page 650.

Lesson 5: Style and Point of View
Key Ideas
The style of a piece of writing is determined by the choices a writer
makes in words, sentence structure, images, and other devices.
A story is written from a narrator’s point of view. The narrator may
be an “outsider” or a character who can reveal only what he or she
sees and thinks.

Style
A writer has many choices when deciding how to write a story. A writer may
use long, complex sentences; short, clipped sentences; or anything in
between. A writer may use flowery or formal language, slang, or spoken
dialect. One writer may use vivid images or symbols, while another writes a
plain, spare story. The individual characteristics that a writer chooses—
sentence structure, choice of words, use of images, and other devices—are all
part of the writer’s style.
As you read this excerpt, look for the characteristics that this particular author
chose. Ask yourself what effect they have on your understanding of
the writing.
The only part of the night I recall without feeling anger or sadness is
loading the horses. Andy and I hardly had the fencing up before Brett
came along with the first ten or twelve. . . . A couple of roans and an
Appaloosa stood out in that first bunch in the starlight, and a bay with
a roached mane. Then Ed brought up a second bunch, about fifteen
mostly dark but a palomino and two paints in there, I remember.
Andy and I shooed them up the ramp, which clattered and thundered
under their hooves. It was a cool night, still. I could feel the horses on
my skin, their body heat swirling around us. I could . . . hear their
nostrils fluttering. I felt hard muscle ripple under my hand when I
clapped a hip to steer them around. I felt their tails slap my back, and
caught a glint in their bared eyes.
From “Stolen Horses” by Barry Lopez, from Writers Harvest 3, edited by Tobias Wolff, copyright ©
2000 by Share Our Strength. Used by permission of Dell Publishing, a division of Random House, Inc.

GED® TEST TIP
You will not have to identify and use terms such as third person
and first person, but you should be able to understand and
appreciate the effect of the writers’ choices.

▶ What is the effect of the author’s description of the horses?
(1) It creates a depth of feeling for the horses’ vitality.
(2) It provides insight into what the characters are doing.
You are correct if you chose (1). The vivid, descriptive details allow you to
imagine the horses and sense their vitality and strength.

Point of View
Another choice a writer makes is which point of view to write from. Will the
narrator be outside the story, watching and revealing the characters’ actions
and perhaps even their thoughts and feelings? If so, the writer will use third
person point of view. Or will the narrator be a character in the story, able to
report only what he or she thinks? In that case, the writer will use first person
point of view.
▶ Which of the following indicates that the narrator is a character and so we
can know only his thoughts?
(1) “The only part of the night I recall . . .”
(2) “Then Ed brought up a second bunch . . .”
(1) is correct. The narrator tells his own thoughts. A clue is the word I.

Practice 5
Questions 1 through 4 refer to the following excerpt from a short story
called “Coach.”
EXCERPTED FROM AN AMATEUR’S GUIDE TO THE NIGHT
1
2
3

“This apartment your mom found is like an office or something. A
studio for her to go to and get away every now and then. . . .”
“She wants to get away from us,” Daphne said.
“Definitely not. She gave me a list, is how this whole thing started.

She’s got stuff she wants to do, and you with your school problems and
me with the team—we’re too much for her, see? She could spend her
entire day on us, if you think about it, and never have one second for
herself. If you think about it fairly, Daphne, you’ll agree.” . . .
4
She made a sigh and marched over to a trash can to deposit her
slumping cone. Then she washed up at the children’s drinking fountain
and rejoined Coach, who had finished his Brown Cow but had kept the
plastic spoon in the mouth.
5
“What was on this list of Mom’s?” Daphne asked.
6
“Adult stuff,” Coach said.
7
“Just give me an example.”
8
Coach removed the plastic spoon and cracked it in half.
9
“Your mother’s list is for five years. In that time, she wants to be
speaking French regularly. She wants to follow up on her printmaking.”
10 “This is adult stuff?” Daphne said.
11 Coach raised a hand to Bobby Stark. Stark had three malt cups in a
cardboard carrier and he was moving toward the parking lot.
12 “Hey, those all for you?” Coach called out.
13 “I got a month to get fat, Coach. You’ll have five months to beat it
off me,” the boy called back.
14 The people at some of the tables around Coach’s lit up with grins.
Bobby Stark’s parents were grinning.
15 “Every hit of that junk takes a second off your time in the forty—just
remember that!” Coach shouted.
16 Stark wagged his head ruefully, his cheeks blushing. He pretended to
hide the malts behind his arm.
From An Amateur’s Guide to the Night by Mary Robison, copyright © 2001, reprinted with the
permission of The Wylie Agency, Inc.

1. What is Bobby Stark’s attitude?
A. He worries about his weight problem.
B. He takes things in stride.
C. He is looking forward to the sports season.

D. He feels unfairly criticized by the coach.
2. Because of the narrator’s point of view, what does the reader know?
A. only Bobby Stark’s actions
B. thoughts and feelings of the characters
C. the actions and speech of the characters
D. only Daphne’s thoughts and feelings
3. Through their dialogue, what kind of relationship can you conclude the
characters have with each other?
A. informal
B. tense
C. suspicious
D. deteriorating
4. Later in the story, Coach has this discussion with his wife, Sherry: “‘It’s
like my apartment,’ Sherry said. ‘A place apart.’ Coach cut her off. ‘Don’t
go on about how much you love your apartment.’”
Based on this information and the excerpt, which of the following best
describes Coach in his discussion with Daphne?
A. brutally frank
B. angry and hostile
C. loving and warm
D. not entirely honest about his feelings
Answers and explanations start on page 650.

Lesson 6: Figurative Language
Key Ideas

Fiction writers and poets use figurative language—words that do not
have their literal meaning—to compare different things.
Some comparisons are introduced by like or as; others are not. Some
comparisons give human characteristics to nonhuman things.

Figurative language refers to words that are being used to mean something
other than their actual, literal meaning. Writers and poets use figurative
language to help paint a mental picture in the reader’s mind. Instead of
saying, “His voice was soothing and pleasing,” for example, a writer might
say, “His voice was like velvet.”
Figurative language often compares two different things. Sometimes the
comparison is signaled by the words like or as, but not always. A writer
might also say, “His voice was velvet.” Another favorite technique of writers
and poets is to give a human characteristic to something nonhuman, such as,
“The wind sighed.”
As you read this poem, look for figurative language and what it might mean.
The School Children
The children go forward with their little satchels.
And all morning the mothers have labored
to gather the late apples, red and gold,
like words of another language.
And on the other shore
are those who wait behind great desks
to receive these offerings.
How orderly they are—the nails
on which the children hang
their overcoats of blue or yellow wool.
And the teachers shall instruct them in silence
and the mothers shall scour the orchards for a way out,
drawing to themselves the gray limbs of the fruit trees

bearing so little ammunition.
From “The House on Marshland” from The First Four Books by Louise Gluck. Copyright 1968, 1971,
1972, 1973, 1974, 1975, 1976, 1977, 1978, 1980, 1985, 1995.

GED® TEST TIP
You are not penalized for wrong answers on the GED® Test,
so do not leave any answers blank. If you return to a skipped
multiple-choice question and still cannot determine the answer,
narrow the choices to the two most reasonable and then select
the one that makes the most sense.
▶ What is suggested by comparing apples to “words of another language” in
the fourth line?
(1) a sense of strangeness, not a part of one’s world
(2) useless things that have no meaning
You are correct if you chose (1). A language different from your own can
seem strange and removed. The mothers feel removed from the world of
teachers and schoolchildren.
▶ What does the word shore in the fifth line refer to?
(1) the farthest edge of a lake
(2) the world of the classroom
You are correct if you chose (2). The mothers in the poem think of school as
far away from them.

Practice 6
Questions 1 through 5 refer to the following poem.

EXCERPTED FROM ”DÉJEUNER SUR L‘HERBE” (“LUNCH ON
THE GRASS”)
1 It’s pleasant to board the ferry in the sunscape
As the late light slants into afternoon;
The faint wind ruffles the river, rimmed with foam.
We move through the aisles of bamboo
Towards the cool water-lilies.
2 The young dandies drop ice into the drinks,
While the girls slice the succulent lotus root.
Above us, a patch of cloud spreads, darkening
Like a water-stain on silk.
3 Write this down quickly, before the rain!
4 Don’t sit there! The cushions were soaked by the shower.
Already the girls have drenched their crimson skirts.
Beauties, their powder streaked with mascara, lament their ruined faces.
5 The wind batters our boat, the mooring-line
Has rubbed a wound in the willow bark.
The edges of the curtains are embroidered by the river foam.
6 Like a knife in a melon, Autumn slices Summer.
7 It will be cold, going back.
Tu Fu, “Déjeuner sur l’herbe,” translated by Carolyn Kizer, from Carrying Over: Poems from the
Chinese, Urdu, Macedonian, Yiddish, and French African. Copyright © 1988 by Carolyn Kizer.
Reprinted with the permission of The Permissions Company, Inc., on behalf of Copper Canyon Press,
www.coppercanyonpress.org.

1. What is compared to “a water-stain on silk” (Stanza 2)?
A. foam on the edge of the river
B. rain clouds approaching
C. lotus root juice on a tablecloth
D. ice cubes dropping into cold drinks
2. What is meant by the statement “lament their ruined faces” (Stanza 4)?

A. They could no longer smile.
B. They were growing old.
C. The rain caused their makeup to run.
D. The wind was chapping their faces.
3. Why is “The edges of the curtains are embroidered by the river foam”
(Stanza 5) an effective use of figurative language?
It helps the reader see that
A. the people forgot to close the windows and curtains
B. the wind is so strong that it is blowing spray from the river into the
boat
C. the curtains are beautifully edged with lace
D. the river is rising quickly
4. According to the speaker, how was the change from summer to autumn
(Stanza 6)?
A. quick and easy
B. halting and uncertain
C. slow and predictable
D. pleasant and smooth
5. Which of the following words best describe the tone of this poem?
A. gentle and calm
B. humorous and playful
C. wry and observant
D. dry and formal
Answers and explanations start on page 650.

Interpreting Fiction Practice Questions

Questions 1 through 3 refer to the following excerpt from a story.
EXCERPTED FROM SHILOH & OTHER STORIES
1

Leroy Moffitt’s wife, Norma Jean, is working on her pectorals. She
lifts three-pound dumbbells to warm up, then progresses to a twentypound barbell. Standing with her legs apart, she reminds Leroy of
Wonder Woman.
2 “I’d give anything if I could just get these muscles to where they’re
real hard,” says Norma Jean. “Feel this arm. It’s not as hard as the other
one.”
3 “That’s cause you’re right-handed,” says Leroy, dodging as she
swings the barbell in an arc.
4 “Do you think so?”
5 “Sure.”
6 Leroy is a truckdriver. He injured his leg in a highway accident four
months ago, and his physical therapy, which involves weights and a
pulley, prompted Norma Jean to try building herself up. Now she is
attending a body-building class. Leroy has been collecting temporary
disability since his tractor-trailer jackknifed in Missouri, badly twisting
his left leg in its socket. He has a steel pin in his hip. He will probably
not be able to drive his rig again. It sits in the backyard, like a gigantic
bird that has flown home to roost. Leroy has been home in Kentucky for
three months, and his leg is almost healed, but the accident frightened
him and he does not want to drive any more long hauls. He is not sure
what to do next. In the meantime, he makes things from craft kits. He
started by building a miniature log cabin from notched Popsicle sticks.
He varnished it and placed it on the TV set, where it remains. It reminds
him of a rustic Nativity scene. Then he tried string art (sailing ships on
black velvet), a macramé owl kit, a snap-together B-17 Flying
Fortress, and a lamp made out of a model truck, with a light fixture
screwed in the top of the cab. At first the kits were diversions, something
to kill time, but now he is thinking about building a full-scale log house
from a kit. It would be considerably cheaper than building a regular
house, and besides, Leroy has grown to appreciate how things are put
together. He has begun to realize that in all the years he was on the road

he never took time to examine anything. He was always flying past
scenery.
Excerpt from Shiloh & Other Stories by Bobbie Ann Mason. Reprinted by permission of
International Creative Management, Inc. Copyright
© 1982 by Bobbie Ann Mason.

1. Which of the following best describes Leroy’s wife, Norma Jean?
A. shy
B. loving
C. self-concerned
D. grumpy
2. By comparing Leroy’s truck to a bird that has flown home to roost, the
author suggests that Leroy
A. comes and goes as he pleases
B. always preferred to be at home “nesting”
C. won’t be driving his truck for a while
D. is a bit “flighty” and unpredictable
3. Why might Leroy be continually making things from craft kits?
Because he
A. is impatient with his leg healing
B. has always enjoyed working with his hands
C. grew tired of bodybuilding
D. doesn’t want to consider what to do next
Questions 4 through 7 refer to this excerpt from a story.
EXCERPTED FROM WINTER’S TALES
1

A small sailor-boy, named Simon, stood on the wet, swinging deck,
held on to a shroud, and looked up towards the drifting clouds, and to the
upper top-gallant yard of the main-mast.

2

A bird, that had sought refuge upon the mast, had got her feet
entangled in some loose tackle-yarn of the halliard, and, high up there,
struggled to get free. The boy on the deck could see her wings flapping
and her head turning from side to side.
3 Through his own experience of life he had come to the conviction that
in this world everyone must look after himself, and expect no help from
others. But the mute, deadly fight kept him fascinated for more than an
hour. He wondered what kind of bird it would be. These last days a
number of birds had come to settle in the barque’s rigging: swallows,
quails, and a pair of peregrine falcons; he believed that this bird was a
peregrine falcon. He remembered how, many years ago, in his own
country and near his home, he had once seen a peregrine falcon quite
close, sitting on a stone and flying straight up from it. Perhaps this was
the same bird. He thought: “That bird is like me. Then she was there, and
now she is here.”
4 At that a fellow-feeling rose in him, a sense of common tragedy; he
stood looking at the bird with his heart in his mouth. There were none of
the sailors about to make fun of him; he began to think out how he might
go up by the shrouds to help the falcon out. He brushed his hair back and
pulled up his sleeves, gave the deck round him a great glance, and
climbed up. He had to stop a couple of times in the swaying rigging.
5 It was indeed, he found when he got to the top of the mast, a peregrine
falcon. As his head was on a level with hers, she gave up her struggle,
and looked at him with a pair of angry, desperate yellow eyes.
6 He had to take hold of her with one hand while he got his knife out,
and cut off the tackle-yarn. He was scared as he looked down, but at the
same time he felt that he had been ordered up by nobody, but that this
was his own venture, and this gave him a proud, steadying sensation, as
if the sea and the sky, the ship, the bird and himself were all one.
From Winter’s Tales by Isak Dinesen, Random House, Inc. © 1942.

4. What can you infer about the boy’s decision to climb the rig?
A. It took some courage.
B. It was a familiar task.
C. It felt like a chore.

D. He was ordered to do it.
5. Which of the following best describes both the
boy and the bird at the beginning of the excerpt?
A. confident
B. alone
C. scared
D. wary
6. Which ideas are most clearly contrasted in this excerpt?
A. love and hate
B. youth and experience
C. fear and fearlessness
D. loneliness and sense of belonging
7. The word _____________ best describes the mood created by the author
in this excerpt.
A. mournful
B. nostalgic
C. peaceful
D. triumphant
Questions 8 through 11 refer to this excerpt from a story.
EXCERPTED FROM “THE LEGEND
OF SLEEPY HOLLOW”
1

“Who are you?” He received no reply. He repeated his demand in a
still more agitated voice. Still there was no answer. Once more he
cudgelled the sides of the inflexible Gunpowder, and, shutting his eyes,
broke forth with involuntary fervor into a psalm-tune. Just then the
shadowy object of alarm put itself in motion, and, with a scramble and a
bound, stood at once in the middle of the road. Though the night was
dark and dismal, yet the form of the unknown might now in some degree

be ascertained. He appeared to be a horseman of large dimensions, and
mounted on a black horse of powerful frame. He made no offer of
molestation or sociability, but kept aloof on one side of the road, jogging
along on the blind side of old Gunpowder, who had now got over his
fright and waywardness.
2 Ichabod, who had no relish for this strange midnight companion, and
bethought himself of the adventure of Brom Bones with the Galloping
Hessian, now quickened his steed, in hopes of leaving him behind. The
stranger, however, quickened his horse to an equal pace. Ichabod pulled
up, and fell into a walk, thinking to lag behind—the other did the same.
His heart began to sink within him; he endeavored to resume his psalmtune, but his parched tongue clove to the roof of his mouth, and he could
not utter a stave. There was something in the moody and dogged silence
of this pertinacious companion, that was mysterious and appalling. It
was soon fearfully accounted for. On mounting a rising ground, which
brought the figure of his fellow-traveller in relief against the sky,
gigantic in height, and muffled in a cloak, Ichabod was horror-struck, on
perceiving that he was headless!—but his horror was still more
increased, on observing that the head, which should have rested on his
shoulders, was carried before him on the pommel of the saddle: his terror
rose to desperation; he rained a shower of kicks and blows upon
Gunpowder, hoping, by a sudden movement, to give his companion the
slip—but the spectre started full jump with him.
3 Away then they dashed, through thick and thin; stones flying, and
sparks flashing at every bound. Ichabod’s flimsy garments fluttered in
the air, as he stretched his long lank body away over his horse’s head, in
the eagerness of his flight.
From “The Legend of Sleepy Hollow” by Washington Irving.

8. What is meant by “he endeavored to resume his psalm-tune” (Paragraph
2)?
Ichabod Crane tried to
A. recite religious doctrine
B. ride more steadily

C. start singing again
D. think of a realistic solution
9. What is the effect of the author’s use of words such as “dashed,” “stones
flying,” and “sparks flashing” (Paragraph 3)?
The words create a feeling of
A. panic
B. clumsiness
C. playfulness
D. magic
10. Which of the following best describes the mood of this excerpt?
A. angry
B. sorrowful
C. suspenseful
D. sentimental
11. Later in the story, the narrator implies that the
horseman had a pumpkin on the pommel of
his saddle. Given this additional information, Ichabod can best be
described as ______________ given his actions in the excerpt.
A. brave in the face of great danger
B. too scared to think rationally
C. moving too quickly
D. quick thinking in his escape
Questions 12 through 16 refer to this excerpt from a story.
EXCERPTED FROM “THE WEDDING
OF HENRY MARKOWITZ”
Those sprawling universities Henry left behind long ago. America, with its
mass-produced undergraduates processed through seedy lecture halls where,

under flickering lights, they slump with their knees up and take in lectures as
they might see movies. Where the familiar passes into the wide pupils of their
eyes and the rest dribbles down the aisles to collect with the dirt and candy
wrappers at the professor’s feet. Has he not been a professor at Queens
College and then NYU? And the graduate students. Hasn’t he seen them at
Princeton clustering at the office doors? Young Calibans eager for praise.
They can tear open the Italian Renaissance before lunch, strangle a Donne
sonnet and crush its wings, battering away with blunt instruments. As for the
older scholars—like students at a cooking school, they cook up Shakespeare,
serve him up like roast goose, stuffed with their political-sexual agendas,
carve and quarter him with long knives. For Henry, reading had always been
a gentle thing, a thing as delicate as blowing eggs. Two pinpricks and the
meaning came, whole, unbroken, into the bowl. Now reading is a boiling and
a breaking, something to concoct. It’s a deviling of art, history, social theory,
politics—all mixed and piped back in and served up on a platter. These are
the scholars in the journals now. They are at war with the beautiful. . . .
Excerpt from “The Wedding of Henry Markowitz” from The Family Markowitz by Allegra Goodman.
Copyright © 1996 by Allegra Goodman. Reprinted by permission of Farrar, Straus and Giroux, LLC.

12. Which of the following is Henry most
interested in?
A. teaching
B. reading
C. students
D. history
13. Based on the passage, it is most likely that
Henry would use the term/phrase _____________ to describe younger
college students.
A. bright
B. open to new ideas
C. a dime a dozen
D. insightful about literature
14. When the author compares Shakespeare to a roast goose in the middle of

the paragraph, what is she suggesting about the older students?
The older students
A. dissect literature too much and ruin the meaning
B. enjoy literature as they would a fine meal
C. throw Shakespeare back in Henry’s face
D. have trouble finding meaning in literature
15. What is the tone of this excerpt?
A. upbeat
B. scholarly
C. disapproving
D. sentimental
16. Later on in the story, Henry refers to his brother as a “shaper himself of
the tawdry yellow thing they sell now as the humanities.”
Based on this information and the excerpt, what is Henry’s attitude toward
college education?
A. indifferent
B. appreciative
C. admiring
D. disapproving
Answers and explanations start on page 651.

CHAPTER 4

Writing Effective Sentences
Lesson 1: Simple Sentences
Key Ideas
Make sure each sentence has a subject and verb and expresses a
complete thought.
If a sentence doesn’t express a complete thought, you may need to
add a subject, verb, or other words.
Use correct end punctuation.

A complete simple sentence has at least one subject and one verb. The
subject is the person, place, or thing that the sentence is talking about. The
subject performs an action or is described. The verb is the word that tells
what action the subject is doing or links the subject to a modifier.

If a sentence is missing either the subject or the verb, it is incomplete. An
incomplete sentence is called a fragment.
EXAMPLES
No subject: Typed up her notes.
Complete sentence: Elaine typed up her notes.
No verb: The computer in the main office.
Complete sentence: The computer in the main office crashed several times.
A complete sentence must also express a complete thought. The reader
should not be left asking questions.
Incomplete thought: When she lost her work. (What happened when she
lost her work?)
Complete thought: Elaine was very frustrated when she lost her work.
Incomplete thought: The person in charge of computer support. (What about
that person?)
Complete thought: Elaine called the person in charge of computer support.
Incomplete thought: By replacing the hard drive.
Complete thought: Elaine can fix the computer by replacing the hard drive.
Finally, a complete sentence should have correct end punctuation. A
statement should end with a period and so should a command. A question
should end with a question mark. An exclamation should end with an
exclamation point.

GED® TEST TIP
Read each sentence in a GED® passage to yourself and pause

at its end. That may help you “hear” whether the sentence is
actually an incomplete thought or a sentence fragment.
Statement: Elaine has lost several files this way.
Command: Turn off the computer.
Question: Will the computer ever be fixed?
Exclamation: What a mess we’re in!
If you find a fragment in your writing, rewrite to make it a complete
sentence.
If the sentence does not have a subject, add a subject.
If the sentence does not have a verb, add a verb.
If the thought is incomplete, add words or combine the incomplete
thought with a complete sentence.

Practice 1
A. Directions: Write C if the sentence is complete or F if the sentence is a
fragment. Rewrite any
fragments to make them complete.
Example
Talks all the time on the telephone. F Dave talks all the time on the
telephone.__________________
1. Drives his girlfriend crazy.
_______________________________________________________
2. As soon as he comes home from work.
_______________________________________________________
3. He calls everyone he knows.

______________________________________________________
4. Dave’s sister and his best friend.
___________________________________________________
B. Questions 5 through 7 refer to the following advertisement.
What Is Three-Way Calling?
Three-way calling is a unique service that enables you to conduct a
conference
the privacy of your own home. You can talk to your
sister in Florida and your mother in Nebraska at the same time. It’s even
possible to seek a third person’s advice when you’re in the middle of a
regular call. For instance,
.
Why wait? This useful and convenient
be yours for only
pennies a month.
5. Three-way calling is a unique service that enables you to conduct a
conference
the privacy of your own home.
A. call. And from
B. call. It from
C. call from
D. calling from
6. For instance,

.

A. if you’re closing a deal, can bring in your lawyer into the conversation
B. if you’re closing a deal, can be bringing your lawyer into the
conversation
C. if you’re closing a deal, you can bring your lawyer into the
conversation
D. if you’re closing a deal, you might could bring your lawyer into the
conversation
7. This useful and convenient
month.

be yours for only pennies a

A. service is
B. service it can
C. service can
D. service. That can
Answers and explanations start on page 651.

Lesson 2: Compound and Complex
Sentences
Key Ideas
You can join two independent clauses into one compound sentence.
Use a coordinating conjunction preceded by a comma.
Choose a conjunction that correctly relates the two ideas.

Compound Sentences
The simple sentences described in Lesson 1 are also called independent
clauses. An independent clause has a subject and a verb and expresses a
complete thought. You can join two or more independent clauses in one
compound sentence. To make a compound sentence, you should:
Choose a logical coordinating conjunction to join the independent
clauses. The coordinating conjunctions are and, but, or, nor, for, so, and
yet.
Insert a comma before the coordinating conjunction.
EXAMPLES
Two independent clauses: Sam saw a design flaw. He wrote a memo.

Joined correctly: Sam saw a design flaw, so he wrote a memo.
No coordinating conjunction: Sam asked his boss, she told him to send it.
Correct: Sam asked his boss, and she told him to send it.
No comma: Sam’s boss was busy so she asked Sam to write the memo.
Correct: Sam’s boss was busy, so she asked Sam to write the memo.
Be sure the coordinating conjunction expresses the correct relationship
between the ideas in the two independent clauses.
Relationship between Ideas

Coordinating Conjunction

join two equally important ideas and
contrast two ideas

but, yet

show a cause

for

show an effect

so

give a choice

or

give no choice

nor

GED® TEST TIP
Be sure that a coordinating conjunction separates two
independent clauses before you choose the option that inserts a
comma before the conjunction.
Incorrect conjunction: Sam showed initiative, yet his boss praised him.
Correct conjunction: Sam showed initiative, and his boss praised him.
Be sure that you are actually joining two independent clauses and not just two
subjects or two verbs.

Incorrect: The designers, and the builders got the memo.
Correct (no comma): The designers and the builders got the memo.
Incorrect: The designers needed the information, and appreciated the memo.
Correct (two independent clauses): The designers needed the information.
They appreciated the memo.
Correct (no comma): The designers needed the information and appreciated
the memo.

Practice 2.1
A. Directions: Using the list on page 118, choose a coordinating
conjunction for each sentence. Rewrite the sentence using the
conjunction preceded by a comma.
EXAMPLE
I didn’t want to seem timid, ________so________ I didn’t tell anyone about
my experience.
1. It was late __________________________________________ I was
walking home from work.
2. My coworker, Judy, had offered to drive me
__________________________ I had refused.
3. It was a warm night _________________________________ I decided to
get some fresh air.
4. It was really my choice. I could have taken a cab
_________________________
I could have walked.
5. I heard a loud noise _____________________ I ran the last block to my

house.
Later, I learned that it was only a car backfiring.
B. Questions 6 through 8 refer to the following paragraph.
Air Couriers
If you want to travel abroad but don’t have a lot of money, one option is to
be an air courier.
gets a cheap ticket in return. Companies use
couriers because it often costs less to check freight as baggage than to ship it
as cargo. Air couriers fly on the major
sometimes they can’t
check any baggage of their own. Couriers usually book their trips
.
6.

gets a cheap ticket in return.
A. An air courier carries shipping documents on an international flight,
and
B. An air courier carries shipping documents on an international flight
and
C. An air courier, carries shipping documents on an international flight,
and
D. An air courier carries shipping documents, on an international flight,
and

7. Air couriers fly on the major
baggage of their own.

sometimes they can’t check any

A. airlines, but
B. airlines but
C. airlines nor
D. airlines, or
8. Couriers usually book their trips

.

A. in advance but they get their tickets on the day of the flight
B. in advance, but they get their tickets on the day of the flight

C. in advance getting their tickets on the day of the flight
D. in advance, but they get their tickets, on the day of the flight
Answers and explanations start on page 651.

Complex Sentences
A complex sentence is made up of an independent clause and a subordinate
clause. A subordinate clause has a subject and verb, but it does not express a
complete thought.

Key Ideas
Join a subordinate and an independent clause to form a complex
sentence.
Use a subordinating conjunction that shows the correct relationship
between ideas.
Put a comma after the subordinate clause when it comes at the
beginning of a sentence.

EXAMPLES
Subordinate clause: Because their pay was too low.

Every subordinate clause begins with a subordinating conjunction that
shows the relationship between the subordinate clause and the independent
clause. Below is a list of common subordinating conjunctions.
Relationship between
Clauses

Subordinating Conjunction

cause/reason

because

effect/result

in order that, so that

time

after, as, before, once, since, until,when,
whenever, while

place

where, wherever

choice

if, whether

contradiction

although, even though, though

Choose the subordinating conjunction that conveys the meaning you are
trying to express.
Incorrect meaning: The strike continued for more than a month once it
finally ended.

GED® TEST TIP
You may need to select the correct subordinating conjunction
to link two clauses. Choose the word or phrase that correctly
conveys the relationship between the ideas.
Correct meaning: The strike continued for more than a month before it
finally ended.
When a subordinate clause comes at the beginning of a sentence, put a
comma after it. If the subordinate clause comes at the end of a sentence, you
generally don’t need a comma before it.
At beginning of sentence: While teachers were on the picket line, kids
stayed home.
At end of sentence: Kids stayed home while teachers were on the picket line.
However, when a subordinate clause at the end of a sentence begins with
although, though, or even though, put a comma before the clause.
At beginning of sentence: Even though the public supported the teachers,

the school board did not concede to the teachers’ demands.
At end of sentence: The school board did not concede to teachers’ demands,
even though the public supported the teachers.
A subordinate clause cannot stand independently. By itself, a subordinate
clause is a sentence fragment. Make sure that every subordinate clause is
joined to an independent clause.
Incorrect: After the strike finished. The school year began.
Corrected by joining independent and subordinate clauses: After the
strike finished, the school year began.

Practice 2.2
A. Directions: Join the clauses to form complex sentences. Use the
subordinating conjunctions in parentheses.
EXAMPLES
(if) You buy a smoke detector. You can protect your family.
If you buy a smoke detector, you can protect your
family.____________________________________
1. Most fatal fires occur. (when) A family is asleep.

_________________________________________________________________________
2. (because) A smoke alarm wakes you up. It can allow you to escape.

_________________________________________________________________________
3. Try to replace the smoke detector’s battery. (before) It goes dead.

_________________________________________________________________________
4. (although) Smoke detectors cost money. The expense is worth it.

_________________________________________________________________________
B. Questions 5 through 7 refer to the following paragraph.
Phone Etiquette
When you
it’s wise to keep a few key rules in mind. First of
all, be prepared. Have paper and pencil ready so that you won’t have to
fumble for them.
the person whether this is a good time to talk.
Get to the point quickly. Before you hang
the person for his or
her time. Finally, put the phone down gently. Slamming down the receiver
makes a poor impression.
5. When you

it’s wise to keep a few key rules in mind.

A. are making a business call
B. are making a business call,
C. will make a business call
D. business call make
6.

the person whether this is a good time to talk.
A. After you identify yourself, ask
B. Whenever you identify yourself, ask
C. After you identify yourself ask
D. After identifying yourself and asking

7. Before you hang

the person for his or her time.

A. up and then Thank
B. up and thank
C. up thank
D. up, thank
Answers and explanations start on page 651.

Lesson 3: Run-Ons and Comma Splices
Key Ideas
A run-on sentence is two or more sentences that are connected
without correct punctuation.
In a comma splice, two sentences are joined with only a comma.
To correct a run-on or comma splice, make a compound or complex
sentence or separate the sentences.

Run-Ons
There are two errors people commonly make when they join independent
clauses to form a sentence. The first type of error is called a run-on. In a runon, two independent clauses are combined without proper punctuation.
Run-On: Banks offer many helpful services you should check them out.
You can correct a run-on in one of several ways:
Break the run-on into two separate sentences.
Correct: Banks offer many services. You should check them out.
Make a compound sentence (add a coordinating conjunction and a
comma).
Correct: Banks offer many services, so you should check them out.
Make a complex sentence (add a subordinating conjunction and, if
necessary, a comma).
Correct: Because banks offer many services, you should check them
out.
A run-on can also consist of independent clauses strung together with and.
Correct this kind of run-on by dividing it into one or more compound
sentences or by combining ideas into one sentence.

Run-On: Banking is getting more and more convenient and you can check
on your account using bank-by-phone services and it’s even possible to do
your banking on the Internet.
Correct: Banking is getting more and more convenient. You can check on
your account using bank-by-phone services, and it’s even possible to do your
banking on the Internet.
Run-On: Friday I got paid and I went to the bank and I cashed my check.
Correct: Friday I got paid, went to the bank, and cashed my check.

GED® TEST TIP
When you read a run-on sentence or a comma splice, look for
the place where you would pause if you read the sentence
aloud. That is the place where you would make the correction.

Comma Splices
The second type of error people sometimes make when joining independent
clauses is called a comma splice. A comma splice occurs when two sentences are joined with just a comma. To correct a comma splice, add a
coordinating conjunction after the comma:
Comma splice: You can check on your account using bank-by-phone
services, it’s even possible to do your banking on the Internet.
Correct: You can check on your account using bank-by-phone services, and
it’s even possible to do your banking on the Internet.
You can also correct a comma splice using the methods described above for
correcting a run-on. You can also join two related ideas with a semicolon.

Comma splice: There are fewer bank tellers today, banks do offer other
services.
Corrected by creating a complex sentence: Although there are fewer bank
tellers today, banks do offer other services.

Practice 3
A. Directions: Correct the following run-ons and comma splices using
the methods explained on page 122. Try to use each method at least
once.
1. Jeff just got his driver’s license, he’s very excited.

_________________________________________________________________________
2. He bought a car that has a lot of miles on it it wasn’t very expensive.

_________________________________________________________________________
3. He doesn’t have a lot of free time, he’d like to take a car trip.

_________________________________________________________________________
4. He needs to find out about car insurance and he needs to get a good map
and he needs to join an auto club.

_________________________________________________________________________
B. Questions 5 through 7 refer to the following paragraph.
Photography Tips
It’s not hard to take great
keep these tips in mind. For one
thing, you need to get close to your subject, or you won’t get a good shot.
for the right moment to shoot. Make sure the lighting is
sufficient. Even outdoors, you can use a flash to fill in shadows.

Think about what you want to emphasize in your picture. You don’t have
to use
allow you to select the focus point you prefer. For
example, many photographs of people focus on the eyes.
5. It’s not hard to take great

keep these tips in mind.

A. pictures if you just
B. pictures just
C. pictures, you just
D. pictures that just
6.

for the right moment to shoot.
A. Be patient, wait
B. Be patient and wait
C. Be patient wait
D. Be patient and you wait

7. You don’t have to use
prefer.

allow you to select the focus point you

A. the autofocus option, most cameras
B. the autofocus option most cameras
C. the autofocus option because most cameras
D. the autofocus option most cameras therefore
Answers and explanations start on page 652.

Lesson 4: Subordinate Ideas
Writing is more effective when it flows smoothly. Therefore, try to eliminate
short, choppy sentences whenever possible. You can do this by using subordination in a variety of ways.

Key Ideas
Use smooth, flowing sentences rather than short, choppy sentences.
Form compound or complex sentences from short
sentences.
Combine two predicates to make a compound predicate or combine
two subjects to make a compound subject.

You already know how to form a complex sentence with a subordinating
clause. You also know how to create compound sentences. Either of these
methods can be used to combine short sentences.
EXAMPLES
Short and choppy: Carla ran for the bus. She missed it.
Complex sentence: Although Carla ran for the bus, she missed it.
Compound sentence: Carla ran for the bus, but she missed it.
If two sentences have the same subject, you can combine them to form one
sentence with a compound predicate. The predicate includes the verb plus
anything else that is not part of the subject:
Short and choppy: Carla sat on the bench. She looked at her watch.
With compound predicate: Carla sat on the bench and looked at her watch.
Likewise, when two sentences have the same predicate, you can combine
them to form one sentence with a compound subject. The resulting sentence
will be less repetitive and wordy:

GED® TEST TIP

Read the passages on the test to yourself as if you could hear
them in your mind. That “silent hearing” will help you notice
sentences that are choppy or repetitive.
Short, choppy, and repetitive: Carla missed the bus. Dave missed the
bus, too.
With compound subject: Carla and Dave missed the bus.
Finally, several short sentences that are related can be combined into one
longer and more detailed sentence:
Short and choppy: Carla missed the bus. It was the 7:45 bus. She was on her
way to work.
More detailed sentence: Carla missed the 7:45 bus on her way to work.
Sometimes, you can use two methods at the same time. For instance, in the
sentence below, you can make a complex sentence with combined details:
Short and choppy: Carla found a pay phone near the bus stop. She called her
boss. Then she called one of her coworkers.
Complex sentence with combined details: After Carla found a pay phone
near the bus stop, she called her boss and one of her coworkers.
Repetitive: Her boss thanked her for calling. Her coworker thanked her for
calling, and they both offered to pass along any messages.
With compound subject and compound predicate: Both her boss and her
coworker thanked her for calling and offered to pass along any messages.

Practice 4
A. Directions: Write each set of short, choppy sentences as one longer,
smooth sentence.

EXAMPLE
If you are in a tornado, keep the windows closed. You should go to a safe
place.
If you are in a tornado, keep the windows closed and go to a safe
place._______________________________
1. Tornadoes can cause a lot of damage. Earthquakes are also capable of
causing a lot
of damage.

_________________________________________________________________________
2. Earthquakes are somewhat common in California. Many Californians do
not seem
to mind.

_________________________________________________________________________
3. On May 20, 2013, there was a tornado. It happened in Oklahoma. Twentyfour people
were killed. Almost 400 people were injured.

_________________________________________________________________________
4. Tornadoes can occur anywhere in the United States. They can happen any
time of year.

_________________________________________________________________________
B. Questions 5 through 7 refer to the following warranty.
Limited Warranty
If there is any defect, Pantronics will repair this unit free of charge. Audio
components will be
to one year after the date of purchase. The
unit
. A proof of purchase, such as a receipt, must be presented
in order to receive service. This warranty does not cover damage

faulty installation.
5. Audio components will be

to one year after date of purchase.

A. repaired. Repairs will then take up
B. repaired and repairs will take place up
C. repaired, the repairs will take place up
D. repaired up
6. The unit

.

A. may be brought or mailed to the service center
B. may be brought to the service center. Or it can be mailed
C. may be brought to the service center. It can be mailed, too
D. may be brought, or mailing it, to the service center
7. This warranty does not cover damage

faulty installation.

A. due to accidents. It does not cover damage due to mishandling or
B. due to accidents, nor it does not cover damage due to mishandling or
C. due to accidents or cover damage due to mishandling or
D. due to accidents, mishandling, or
Answers and explanations start on page 652.

Lesson 5: Modify Ideas
Modifiers are words and phrases used to add descriptive details. A modifier
might be a word like sweaty, a verb phrase like dragging the heavy box, a
prepositional phrase like from the storage room, or a clause like that we
packed this morning. Modifiers make writing clearer, more specific, and
more interesting.

Key Ideas

Modifiers make writing clearer and more interesting.
Correct a dangling modifier by turning it into a subordinate clause or
by making the word that is modified the subject of the sentence.
Place a modifier as near as possible to the word or phrase it describes.

EXAMPLES
Without modifiers: Our friends Jack and Tina helped us while we were
moving.
With modifiers: Our good friends Jack and Tina helped us while we were
moving, watching our baby in their home.
Without modifiers: We realized the weather would not cooperate.
With modifiers: Sweating profusely at 9 a.m., we realized the weather would
be uncooperatively hot.
Use modifiers carefully, or your meaning will be unclear. A dangling
modifier is a word or phrase at the beginning of the sentence that has no
clear subject to describe. To correct a dangling modifier, turn it into a
subordinate clause, or make the word that the modifier describes into the
subject of
the sentence.
Dangling modifier: Driving the truck, one of the boxes fell out. (Who was
driving the truck—one of the boxes?)
Correct: As we were driving the truck, one of the boxes fell out.
Correct: Driving the truck, we heard one of the boxes fall out.
Dangling modifier: Parking in a tow zone, a police officer gave us a ticket.
(It sounds as if the police officer were parking in the tow zone.)
Correct: Because we parked in a tow zone, a police officer gave us a ticket.

Dangling modifier: Never having planned a move before, the real estate
agent gave us some tips. (It sounds as if the real estate agent is the one who
had never planned a move.)

GED® TEST TIP
When a modifying phrase is at the beginning of a sentence, use
a comma to separate it from the rest of the sentence.
Correct: Never having planned a move before, we asked the real estate agent
for some tips.
A misplaced modifier is poorly placed in the sentence. It is not clear which
word it modifies, or it modifies the wrong word in the sentence. To correct
a misplaced modifier, put the modifier next to the word it describes.
Misplaced modifier: The moving van was just large enough that we rented.
Correct: The moving van that we rented was just large enough.
Misplaced modifier: We hoisted and lugged all our furniture up two flights
of stairs panting heavily. (What was panting heavily—we or the stairs?)
Correct: Panting heavily, we hoisted and lugged all our furniture up two
flights of stairs.

Practice 5
A. Directions: Revise each sentence, correcting the misplaced or dangling
modifier.
1. Trent’s sister encouraged him to become a nurse, who is a health
professional.

_________________________________________________________________________
2. Waking up the patients to take their blood pressure, they get rather
annoyed.

_________________________________________________________________________
3. He writes their temperature and blood pressure on their charts carefully.

_________________________________________________________________________
4. Talking with the patients, it is hard to make visitors leave at 9 p.m.

_________________________________________________________________________
B. Questions 5 through 7 refer to the following passage about adoption.
Adoption
Adoption is a legal procedure that gives
. This practice dates
back to ancient Greece. People without heirs used it to perpetuate their
estates.
Adoptions may be handled through an agency or by independent
placement.
whether prospective parents will be fit. In an
independent placement, there is no study. Lawyers
.
5. Adoption is a legal procedure that gives

.

A. a person the rights of a son or daughter, who is not the adopter’s birth
child
B. a person who is not the birth child of the adopter the rights of a son or
daughter
C. a person a son’s or daughter’s rights, who is not a birth child
D. a person the rights of a birth child, who is not a son or daughter of the
adopter
6.

whether prospective parents will be fit is required.

A. Going through an agency, a “home study” is required to determine
B. Undergoing a “home study,” an agency determines
C. An agency requires a “home study” to determine
D. Requiring a “home study,” parents undergo such a study to determine
7. Lawyers

.

A. handle these adoptions when parents ask them to frequently
B. handle these adoptions when frequently asked to do so by parents
C. handle these adoptions when parents ask them to, frequently
D. frequently handle these adoptions when parents ask them to
Answers and explanations start on page 652.

Lesson 6: Parallel Structure
When you write a sentence that lists two or more words, phrases, or clauses,
the elements in the list must be in the same grammatical form. In other
words, the sentence must have parallel structure. Writing that has parallel
structure is clearer and easier to follow.

Key Ideas
Listed items should be parallel in form and structure.
Each phrase should have the same elements as other phrases in the
series.
Don’t put individual words and full clauses together in the same
series.

Examples
Not parallel: Jim wants to eat less, exercise more, and be getting more sleep.
Parallel: Jim wants to eat less, exercise more, and get more sleep.

Not parallel: Walking and to swim are good aerobic exercises.
Parallel: Walking and swimming are good aerobic exercises.
Not parallel: Try to lose weight slowly, sensibly, and be careful.
Parallel: Try to lose weight slowly, sensibly, and carefully.
To be sure that your sentences have parallel structure, follow the guidelines below.
Make sure that verbs in a list are in the same form and tense:
Not parallel: Jim went to the store, bought an exercise mat, and is doing
exercises.
Parallel: Jim went to the store, bought an exercise mat, and did exercises.
Be sure that phrases in a list are parallel in form and wording. For example, if
one phrase in a list begins with a preposition, the others should, too. If one
phrase begins with the word the, the others should, too.
Not parallel: Avoid exercising on busy streets, near traffic jams, and polluted areas.
Parallel: Avoid exercising on busy streets, near traffic jams, and in polluted
areas.
Not parallel: He left the gym shoes, sweatpants, and the shirt in the gym.
Parallel: He left the gym shoes, the sweatpants, and the shirt in the gym.
Each list must have single words, short phrases, or clauses. Don’t put single
words and clauses together in the same series:

GED® TEST TIP

When you revise a sentence to use parallel stracture, use the
comma to separate each element as shown in these examples.
Not parallel: The most effective fitness programs are low impact, informal,
and you can do them at home.
Parallel: The most effective fitness programs are low impact, informal, and
home-based.
Finally, notice that a comma separates each item within a list of three or
more: low impact, informal, and home-based.

Practice 6
A. Directions: Rewrite each sentence to make the structure parallel.
EXAMPLE
Jenna works quickly, carefully, and is thorough.
Jenna works quickly, carefully, and thoroughly.
____________________________________________
1. Jenna has worked in a factory, a store, and has a waitressed.

_________________________________________________________________________
2. She would like putting her kids in a better school and to get a better job.

_________________________________________________________________________
3. She thinks the kids’ father is irresponsible, lazy, and doesn’t care about
them.

_________________________________________________________________________
4. He doesn’t have the time, the energy, or money to give them what they
deserve.

_________________________________________________________________________
B. Questions 5 through 7 refer to the following memo.
TO: All Employees
A new alarm system has been installed. It is designed to make our
workplace
. However, we need everyone’s cooperation.
If you are the last one to leave, turn off all lights,
coffee
makers. Then go to the alarm system located by the door. Punch in
. Lock the door behind you.
5. It is designed to make our workplace

.

A. safer, more comfortable, and pleasant
B. safer and make it more comfortable and pleasant
C. safer, more comfortable, and more pleasant
D. safer, more comfortable, and make it more pleasant
6. If you are the last one to leave, turn off all lights,
makers.

coffee

A. and computers, and the
B. computers, and check the
C. computers, and checking the
D. computers, and
7. Punch in

.

A. the secret code, press ON, and leaving immediately
B. the secret code, pressing ON, and immediately leaving
C. the secret code, press ON, and leave immediately
D. the secret code, press ON, and then you will leave immediately
Answers and explanations start on page 652.

Writing Effective Sentences Practice
Questions
Questions 1 through 5 refer to the following paragraphs.
Conserving Household Energy
According to the Department of Energy, many families spend an average
of 14 percent of their yearly income on heating and cooling costs. Although
you can’t do much about high fuel prices, you can try some energy-saving
measures.
To reduce wintertime energy costs, keep the shades drawn at night.
the cracks. You can use sealing material available at any
hardware store. If you have an air conditioner, cover it with thick plastic.
Keep your thermostat at 68°F
.
In the summer, use fans and natural breezes rather than air-conditioning
whenever possible. If you have windows that get direct
the
shades down during the day. Don’t leave your air conditioner running when
you’re not at
the filter every summer. With a clogged filter, the
air conditioner’s energy use can go up as much as 5 percent. Put your air
conditioner on a low setting. Your home
.
1.

the cracks.
A. Sealing your windows, so that cold air can’t get through
B. Seal your windows so that cold air can’t get through
C. Seal your windows, so that cold air couldn’t get out
D. Your windows being sealed, cold air won’t get through

2. Keep your thermostat at 68°F

.

A. during the day, and it should be kept at 62° at night
B. during the day and 62° at night
C. during the day. Keep it at 62° at night
D. during the day. At night, it should be kept at 62°

3. If you have windows that get direct
the day.

the shades down during

A. sun and
B. sun and to keep
C. sun keep
D. sun, keep
4. Don’t leave your air conditioner running when you’re not at
the filter every summer.
A. home and change
B. home change
C. home, so change
D. home. Do change
5. Your home

.

A. will not cool down any faster when your air conditioner is on full blast
B. any faster will not cool down having your air conditioner on full blast
C. will not cool down having your air conditioner on full blast any faster
D. will not cool down when any faster your air conditioner is on full blast
Questions 6 through 10 refer to the following letter of complaint.
Cole Electronics
2514 Broadway
New York, NY 10057
Dear Manager:
On August 2, I purchased a television at your store.
that the
picture was fuzzy.
be fixed easily. I assumed that there would be
no problem because I had just purchased the set.
The customer service personnel said they had no time to handle my
complaint. They were extremely rude and unprofessional. Finally, a salesman

told me that I would have to send the TV to a service center in Detroit. At
that point, I demanded a refund.
it could not be returned.
I am
. I would now like to receive a full
the TV
repaired locally. Please contact me to let me know what action will be taken.
My phone number is (212) 555-2719.
Sincerely,
Jeffrey Barnes
6.

that the picture was fuzzy.
A. When I got the television home I discovered
B. When I got the television home, I discovered
C. When I got the television home. I discovered
D. When I got the television home I discovered,

7.

be fixed easily.
A. I returned to the store to see if the problem could
B. Returned to the store, I wanted to see if the problem could
C. Returning to the store, the problem could
D. Returning to the store to see if the problem could

8.

it could not be returned.
A. He claimed that because the TV had been used,
B. Claiming that because the TV had been used,
C. The TV was claimed to be used, and therefore
D. Claimed that the TV had been used and said

9. I am

.

A. angry and frustrated about the treatment I received
B. angry about the treatment I received. I am also very frustrated
C. angry about the treatment I received, I am also frustrated
D. angry about the treatment I received I am also frustrated

10. I would now like to receive a full

the TV repaired locally.

A. refund, getting
B. refund, or getting
C. refund or get
D. refund to getting
Questions 11 though 15 refer to the following paragraphs.
Workplace Friendships
Should you make friends at work or keep your distance? Most experts
agree that it’s not wise to get too chummy with your boss. Relationships with
coworkers, however, are a more complex matter. Although workplace
friendships between peers can be beneficial, they can also cause problems.
Workplace friendships have many positive aspects. It’s hard to
. Having friends at work
. Friends can serve as a
sounding board for problems and help you succeed.
However, like any other friendship, workplace friendships can turn sour.
in plain view of your boss and coworkers. Discrimination and
harassment suits have even been brought in some cases.
Experts recommend keeping your social life with work friends out of the
workplace. For instance, don’t exchange presents at
about your
evening out. Avoid praising a friend publicly if it could make someone else
resentful. Keeping your work life separate from your social life
.
11. It’s hard to

.

A. work productively if you feel alone
B. work if you feel alone and in a productive way
C. work in a productive way and feeling alone
D. work, it isn’t easy if you feel alone, productively
12. Having friends at work

.

A. can make your day more pleasant. And can give you energy

B. can make your day more pleasant, and give you energy
C. can make your day more pleasant and give you energy
D. can make your day, giving you energy, more pleasant
13.

in plain view of your boss and coworkers.
A. Things get messy, when the friendship unravels
B. Things get messy when the friendship unravels
C. Things are getting messy, when the friendship unravels
D. Things getting messy when the friendship unravels

14. For instance, don’t exchange presents at
out.

about your evening

A. work or talk
B. work, or talk
C. work, or talking
D. working or talking
15. Keeping your work life separate from your social life

.

A. is worth the effort although it be hard
B. may be hard, but it’s worth the effort
C. is worth the effort it may be hard
D. may be hard but, it’s worth the effort
Questions 16 through 19 refer to the following paragraphs.
Computer Virus Hoaxes
If you use email, you’ve probably received at least one message warning
you of a terrible virus that will ruin your computer. Most of these messages
are
to scare you. Though some messages about viruses are
accurate, most are just inaccurate rumors.
Virus hoax messages are similar to one another. Frequently, they describe
viruses that will destroy your hard drive or computer. These hoaxes also

claim that a respected authority, such as a government agency, has issued a
warning about the virus. You can
. Finally, hoaxes urge you to
send the message to everyone you
just creates panic.
If you receive a virus warning, don’t pass it on. However, you don’t have
to worry about opening the email message itself. Your computer can’t get a
virus that way. Don’t open any suspicious attachments, though, as you might
infect your computer with a real virus. By following these guidelines, you
can
.
16. Most of these messages are

to scare you.

A. hoaxes and they are designed
B. hoaxes and they designed
C. hoaxes, designing
D. hoaxes designed
17. You can

.

A. check a claim like this. Contacting the agency is a good way to check
B. check a claim like this by contacting the agency
C. check a claim like this, is contacting the agency
D. check a claim like this, contact the agency
18. Finally, hoaxes urge you to send the message to everyone you
just creates panic.
A. know and this
B. know, this
C. know. This
D. know that this
19. By following these guidelines, you can

.

A. keep your computer equipment safe, and avoid spreading hysteria
B. avoid spreading hysteria, keep your computer equipment safe
C. avoiding spreading hysteria by keeping your computer equipment safe

D. keep your computer equipment safe and avoid spreading hysteria
Answers and explanations start on page 652.

CHAPTER 5

Connecting Ideas
Lesson 1: Organize Ideas into Paragraphs
Effective Paragraphs
A paragraph is a group of sentences that relate to one main idea. If the sentences do not help develop the same main idea, the paragraph seems
disorganized, and the writer’s meaning is unclear.

Key Ideas
Each paragraph should have one main idea. Each sentence in the
paragraph should relate to the main idea.
Break long paragraphs into two if possible.
Join short paragraphs if they both relate to the same main idea.

Incorrect: Group of sentences that do not relate to the same main idea:
Houseplants make a home more beautiful, but many people find them
difficult to take care of. I water my houseplants once a week. There
are many different kinds of houseplants. If you are buying a
houseplant as a gift, consider how much light the person’s home gets.
In the example above, each sentence is about houseplants, but there is no
main idea. In the paragraph below, however, each sentence supports one idea:
helping houseplants adjust to a new home.
Correct: Paragraph with sentences that relate to one main idea:
Houseplants need help to adjust to a new environment. Your home is
probably less bright and humid than a greenhouse or plant store.
Therefore, when you get a new houseplant, keep it near a south-facing
window at first. Move it away from the light over a period of four
weeks. Use a humidifier to make the air in your home more humid.
These actions will help avoid the loss of foliage that often occurs
when plants change locales.
One paragraph should stop and a new one begin when the main idea shifts. In
the example below, the first four sentences describe what road rage is, while
the last four sentences tell how to react to road rage. The writer should have
started a new paragraph with sentence 5.

GED® TEST TIP
If a paragraph is especially long, check to see if the main idea
shifts at some point. If so, that is where the paragraph should
be divided in two.
Incorrect: One paragraph that should be divided into two paragraphs:
(1) Road rage is an episode of violent behavior that takes place when

one driver’s actions anger another driver. (2) Young males are the
most likely to lose their cool on the road. (3) Most road rage incidents
take place during rush hour, when people often get frustrated. (4)
Warm weather is another factor in road rage. (5) If you’re a victim of
an aggressive driver, try to stay calm. (6) Don’t react or make eye
contact. (7) Try not to brake or swerve in retaliation. (8) These actions
will only infuriate the other driver, and you might lose control of your
car.
Sometimes the ideas in two paragraphs really belong in one:
Incorrect: Two paragraphs that should be combined:
To make chicken broth, boil a pot of water. Take some chicken,
onions, parsnips, carrots, and herbs, and wrap them up in cheesecloth.
Make sure it is real cotton cheesecloth, or you won’t be able to eat the
broth! Simmer the cheesecloth-wrapped vegetables and chicken in the
water for several hours; then remove them. Add salt and pepper to
taste.

Practice 1.1
A. Directions: Read each group of sentences. If there is a main idea,
underline it. If there is no main idea, write No MI.
____ 1. The pharmacist at the local drugstore is very helpful. She can always
get the
medicines we need. She arranges deliveries of our prescriptions when
we’re sick. When we don’t have money, she lets us pay the next time.
Many people have written to thank her.
____ 2. Keep your toolbox well equipped, and you’ll always be able to make
home repairs. Common home repairs include replacing lighting
fixtures and fixing furniture. The community center offers a class on
this subject. You can pay someone to do home repairs.
____ 3. Some people don’t vote because they think their vote doesn’t count.

However, elections have been won by just a few hundred votes. If
people don’t vote, they are giving up their voice. Every vote counts,
so let your voice be heard and vote!
____ 4. When you are traveling, it’s a good idea to mark your luggage clearly.
Put a luggage tag on every piece you intend to bring, including hand
luggage like backpacks. To recognize your luggage quickly, put a
brightly colored ribbon on it.
____ 5. Listening to music can benefit you in many ways. When you are
feeling stressed, music can help soothe and relax you. When you
need energy, rock ’n’ roll or hip-hop can give you a boost. If you
have a baby or small child, soft music can help lull the child to sleep.
B. Questions 6 and 7 refer to the following paragraphs.
The Common Cold
(A)
(1) How frequently you get colds depends on your age. (2) The average
young adult gets two to four colds a year. (3) Adults over 60 have fewer than
one cold a year, while children have six to ten colds annually. (4) Colds are
caused by viruses. (5) Contrary to popular belief, being cold will not cause
you to get a cold. (6) Vitamin C is thought to prevent colds, but there is no
proof.
(B)
(7) Because there is no cure for the common cold, prevention is key. (8)
Washing your hands is the best way to avoid getting a cold. (9) Encourage
others who have colds to sneeze into a tissue and throw it away immediately.
(C)
(10) Refrain from touching your eyes and nose, and stay far from people
who have colds.
6. Which revision would improve the

effectiveness of the article?
Begin a new paragraph with
A. sentence 2
B. sentence 3
C. sentence 4
D. sentence 5
7. Which revision would improve the
effectiveness of the article?
A. remove sentence (1)
B. remove paragraph B
C. remove paragraph C
D. join paragraphs B and C
Answers and explanations start on page 653.

Topic Sentences in Paragraphs
Every paragraph should have a topic sentence that states the main idea. The
other sentences in the paragraph are supporting details. These details tell
more about the topic sentence. The topic sentence usually appears at the
beginning of the paragraph, though it may appear elsewhere.

Key Ideas
A topic sentence states the main idea of a paragraph.
Each sentence in a paragraph should provide details to support the
main idea.
An essay should have a main idea statement that states the main point
of the entire essay.

A topic sentence must do two things:
Identify the topic, or subject, of the paragraph
State the central point that the writer wants to make about the topic
In the paragraph below, the topic sentence is underlined. Notice how the
topic sentence tells the subject of the paragraph (graffiti in our neighborhood)
and states the central point about the topic (graffiti is a serious problem in the
neighborhood and should be addressed).
EXAMPLE
We need to do more to stop the problem of graffiti in our
neighborhood. Recently, several bus stops and the exterior walls of
many buildings have been defaced with unsightly graffiti. The
neighborhood is fast becoming a much less desirable place to live. As
a result, prospective renters feel frightened and look elsewhere.
A topic sentence should not be too specific or too general. If it is, readers
won’t know what the overall point is. A topic sentence like “The market is
covered with gang symbols” would be too specific for the paragraph above.
“There is graffiti in our neighborhood” would be too general.

GED® TEST TIP
Be sure that every paragraph has a clear topic sentence.

Main Idea Statements in Essays
Just as every paragraph should have a topic sentence, so every essay should
have a main idea statement. Whereas a topic sentence states the main idea,
or “point,” of a single paragraph, a main idea statement expresses the central
point of all the paragraphs in an essay. In the essay below, the main idea
statement is underlined. Notice that while the main idea statement appears in

the first paragraph, it is not the first sentence.
EXAMPLE
While graffiti is indeed a serious problem facing our neighborhood,
other issues also need to be addressed. Two of the most pressing
neighborhood issues are the crime rate and the lack of decent housing.
In recent months, crime has increased. For example, a number of
muggings have occurred. As a result, residents are nervous about
going out at night. The number of apartment break-ins has increased
as well. We need a stronger police presence to combat the crime
problem.
In addition, much of the housing in this neighborhood is in poor
condition. Every day, residents are put in danger by peeling paint,
broken locks, and rundown fences. We must put pressure on landlords
to resolve their tenants’ complaints, perhaps by showing them that, in
the long run, it is in their financial interest to do so.
If we do not act immediately, our neighborhood will decline even
more. Therefore, I recommend that we form a community task force
to tackle these issues. We should ask our city councilwoman to be an
advocate for us. With full participation of community members, we
will be on our way to a safer, more livable neighborhood.

Practice 1.2
A. Directions: Write topic sentences for each of the following
paragraphs.
1. _____________________________________________________________________
Weather satellites send us information about weather around the world.
Thanks to satellite TV, we have an ever-widening range of programs to
choose from. Satellites even play a role in long-distance telephone
communication.

2. _____________________________________________________________________
First of all, stock prices are falling. Second, home sales have slowed to a
crawl. Finally, many consumers have cut back on big purchases such as
cars, home improvements, and vacations.
3. _____________________________________________________________________
According to the new dress code, employees of the library may now wear
“semi-casual” clothing. Khakis, blue jeans with no holes, and other slacks
are acceptable for men and women. Skirts must be knee-length or longer.
Sandals are acceptable in the summer. Employees are requested not to
wear gym shoes.
B. Questions 4 and 5 refer to the following paragraphs.
Repetitive Strain Injury
(A)
Repetitive strain injury is a problem. The injury can affect factory workers,
computer users, and meatpackers, among others. Anyone who uses his or her
hands all day may be affected, even if the work does not seem to require a lot
of physical effort. When fine hand movements are repeated for many hours a
day, they eventually strain the forearms, wrists, and fingers.
(B)
Maintaining a stiff and constrained posture, as is required for working at a
computer, places a lot of stress on the body. Likewise, holding muscles still
for long periods causes fatigue and discomfort. In addition, many jobs require
workers to work at top speed all day long. Consistently working quickly
deprives the body of natural rest breaks, forcing workers to push themselves
to the limit.
4. Which is the most effective revision of sentence 1?
A. Some workers get repetitive strain injury.
B. Just what, you may ask, is repetitive
strain injury?

C. Workers suffer many injuries on the job, and repetitive strain injury is
just one
of them.
D. Repetitive strain injury is a painful
condition resulting from repeated use
of the hands.
5. Which sentence would be most effective if inserted at the beginning of
paragraph B?
A. Repetitive movements cause muscle strain.
B. A number of factors contribute to repetitive strain injury.
C. Watch your posture as you work.
D. Repetitive strain injury is very common.
Answers and explanations start on page 653.

Lesson 2: Use Logical Order and Relevant
Ideas
Key Ideas
The sentences in a paragraph should follow a logical order.
Keep reasons and examples close to the point you are making with
them.
Eliminate any irrelevant details.

When you are writing a paragraph, it is important to put your sentences in
a logical order. For instance, you may choose to sequence supporting details
from most important to least important, from least important to most
important, or in time order. All the sentences in the paragraph should follow
the same order. If not, your readers may get confused. Look at the sample

paragraphs below:
Incorrect: Sentences not in time order:
To clear a clogged drain using a plunger, fill the sink with enough
water to cover the plunger cup. Put petroleum jelly on the rim of the
cup to form a tight seal. Before you begin, check to make sure that the
plunger’s suction cup is big enough to cover the drain. Block the sink
overflow with rags. Plunge 15 or 20 times.
Correct: Sentences in time order:
To clear a clogged drain using a plunger, first check to make sure that
the plunger’s suction cup is big enough to cover the drain. Fill the
sink with enough water to cover the plunger cup. Put petroleum jelly
on the rim of the cup to form a tight seal. Block the sink overflow
with rags. Plunge 15 or 20 times.
The reasons and examples you use to support your points should come
immediately after you make each point. If they come later, they will be less
effective.
Incorrect: Reason far from point:
Don’t make a habit of using chemicals to clear your drain. Always
wear rubber gloves to protect your hands when using chemical drain
cleaners. These powerful cleaners can damage the pipes.

GED® TEST TIP
Make sure that every supporting sentence is relevant to the
topic sentence. Ask yourself, “Does this support the main idea
of the paragraph?” If not, delete it or move it to where it
belongs.

Correct: Reason close to point:
Don’t make a habit of using chemicals to clear your drain. These
powerful cleaners can damage the pipes. Always wear rubber gloves
to protect your hands when using chemical drain cleaners.
Sometimes a sentence in a paragraph relates to the topic in a general way but
does not support the topic sentence. This mistake is a type of irrelevant
detail, as shown in the paragraph below:
In many cultures, blonde is considered a desirable hair color. Perhaps
blonde hair is valued because few people are naturally blonde. The
practice of bleaching one’s hair blonde is very old, dating back to
ancient Roman times, and it continues to be popular today. My sister
dyed her hair last year. A number of hair-bleaching products are sold
in drugstores and supermarkets.
The sentence “My sister dyed her hair last year,” is an irrelevant detail. While
it relates to the topic of bleaching one’s hair, it does not support the idea that
blonde is a popular hair color in many cultures. This sentence should be
deleted.

Practice 2
A. Directions: Cross out the irrelevant detail in each paragraph.
1. Why do people blame themselves when things go terribly wrong? Some
psychologists believe that by blaming themselves, people find a reason for
the upsetting event. Getting very ill is one bad thing that could happen.
Finding a reason is more comforting than believing that the event took
place for no reason at all.
2. It’s almost time for the back-to-school rush. This year, come to The
Supply Shop to make sure that your child is outfitted with all the things
that he or she needs. We have school supplies at rock-bottom prices. Adult
students can also use school supplies. Check out our backpacks and lunch
boxes in colors your kids will love. At The Supply Shop, we have

everything your kids will ever need!
3. Tenants: On Friday, April 23, the boiler in this building will be fixed. This
job will be extremely expensive! There will be no water from 8 a.m. to 5
p.m. Please plan in advance, and draw out water the night before to be
used the next day. We apologize for the inconvenience.
B. Questions 4 through 6 refer to the following cover letter.
(A)
Dear Mr. Soros:
(1) Thank you very much for taking the time to speak with me about the
carpentry position.
(2) It was a pleasure to meet you and to learn about your organization. (3) I
enjoyed meeting you and learning about your organization.
(B)
(4) As you will see from the enclosed resume, I recently completed a
program in carpentry at Dade Community College. (5) I have also worked in
the carpentry field. (6) In addition, I held a secretarial job.
(C)
(7) With my education and experience, I believe that I could make a
valuable contribution to your company. (8) Thank you for considering me for
this position. (9) I look forward to hearing from you soon. (10) I would be
honored to take the job if it were offered to me.
Sincerely,
Sandra Barnes
4. Which revision would improve the effectiveness of paragraph A?
A. remove sentence 1
B. move sentence 1 to follow sentence 2

C. move sentence 2 to the beginning of paragraph B
D. remove sentence 3
5. Sentence 6: In addition, I held a secretarial job.
Which revision should be made to the placement of sentence 6?
A. move sentence 6 to follow sentence 4
B. move sentence 6 to follow sentence 8
C. move sentence 6 to follow sentence 10
D. remove sentence 6
6. Sentence 10: I would be honored to take the job if it were offered to me.
Which revision should be made to the placement of sentence 10?
A. move sentence 10 to follow sentence 2
B. move sentence 10 to follow sentence 4
C. move sentence 10 to follow sentence 5
D. move sentence 10 to follow sentence 8
Answers and explanations start on page 653.

Lesson 3: Relate Sentences and Paragraphs
Key Ideas
Use transitions to help your writing flow from sentence to sentence
and from paragraph to paragraph.
Choose the transition that expresses the correct relationship between
ideas.

Good writing flows smoothly and logically from one sentence to the next and
from one paragraph to the next. To make your writing flow, use transitions

to show how ideas are related. Here are some common transitions and their
uses.
Transitional Word or Phrase

Use it to . . .

for example, for instance

give an example

also, furthermore, in addition, in the same way,
likewise, moreover, similarly

compare ideas or add
to an idea

however, nevertheless, on the other hand, in
contrast

contrast ideas

first, second, then, next, after that, later, at last,
finally, in conclusion

show steps in a process
or time order

because

show a cause

as a result, consequently

show a result

therefore, thus

draw a conclusion

You can link two sentences using transitions in the following ways:
EXAMPLES
Begin the second sentence with a transition followed by a comma: Raquel
has many hobbies. For example, she paints furniture and sews clothes.
Put the transition within the second sentence and set it off with commas:
Raquel has many hobbies. She paints furniture, for example, and
sews clothes.
Combine the two sentences into one. Put a semicolon before the
transition and a comma after it: Raquel has many hobbies; for example,
she paints furniture and sews clothes.
Transitions can also be used to link one paragraph to another, highlighting the
relationship between the two paragraphs.

GED® TEST TIP

When you use a transition at the beginning of a sentence, be
sure you put a comma after the transition.
EXAMPLE
Top performance in sports depends on “mental economy.” Mental
economy involves focusing the mind on the task at hand. When
athletes think too much about what they’re doing or worry about the
outcome, they interfere with the communication between the brain
and the muscles.
In addition, athletes must strive for “physical economy.” Although
athletes put forth a tremendous amount of effort, they must take care
to pace themselves in order to conserve energy for the end of the
event.
To decide which transition to use, see how the paragraph is organized and
what you are trying to accomplish. For example, are you comparing two
things? If so, you will want to use transitions that compare ideas. Similarly,
when choosing transitions to introduce paragraphs, consider the organization
of the entire essay.

Practice 3
A. Directions: Rewrite each pair of sentences using a transition from the
chart on page 140.
Change the punctuation if necessary. Write your answers on a
separate sheet of paper.
Example: We have worked very hard this year. Sales are at an all-time
high.
We have worked very hard this year. As a result, sales are at an all-time
high.______________________________
1. Our marketing efforts need to be enhanced. We will soon begin another
marketing

initiative.
2. Sales representatives say their jobs are extremely demanding. The salary is
attractive.
3. The marketing director has instructed sales representatives to try some new
ideas. Sales
representatives can give away free samples.
4. A new ad campaign will be launched in just a few weeks. We expect sales
to increase.
B. Questions 5 through 7 refer to the following paragraphs.
Library Cafés
Until very recently, eating was not something that most people associated
with libraries. A patron would likely be chased out for munching on a
sandwich in a corner.
and a croissant in some public libraries.
Following the lead of successful bookstores, libraries across the country
are installing cafés. Some library cafés have menus that offer just as much
variety as a regular
, one of them offers 20 varieties of coffee,
hot cider, and muffins. These refreshments make going to the library more
pleasant and may therefore increase library patronage.
may benefit a library financially. The income from the café
adds to library revenues. Also, as more people enjoy coming to the library,
they may be more likely to approve tax increases for it.
5.

and a croissant in some public libraries.
A. Times however are changing, and these days patrons can even buy
coffee
B. Times are changing, however, and these days patrons can even buy
coffee
C. Times are changing, and these days, however patrons can even buy
coffee
D. Times are changing, and these days patrons can even buy coffee,

however
6. Some library cafés have menus that offer just as much variety as a regular
one of them offers 20 varieties of coffee, hot cider, and
muffins.
A. restaurant, in addition,
B. restaurant. For example,
C. restaurant. Nevertheless,
D. restaurant. Thus,
7.

may benefit a library financially.
A. In addition, having a café
B. On the other hand, having a café
C. A café, by benefiting a library,
D. Financially a café

Answers and explanations start on page 653.

Connecting Ideas Practice Questions
Questions 1 through 5 refer to the following paragraphs.
The Effects of Lack of Sleep
(A)
(1) Research shows that about 70 million North Americans have
experienced the problem of sleep disruption. (2) Losing sleep is more than
just an annoyance. (3) In some cases, it can have catastrophic results. (4) In
the United States, sleepy drivers are responsible for at least 100,000 car
crashes each year. (5) Most people need at least eight hours of shut-eye a
night but get only six or seven. (6) Their fast-paced lives leave them little
time for sleep. (7) Another factor is poor bedtime habits. (8) Family stresses

may also cause sleep loss.
(B)
(9) A study of high school students showed that students with low grades
went to bed 40 minutes later and got 25 minutes less sleep than students with
high
another study shows that when one gets fewer than six to
eight hours of sleep, it is harder to learn new skills.
(C)
(10) If you have trouble sleeping, avoid caffeine and alcohol. (11) Get
regular exercise during the day, when it won’t make you too energized to
sleep. (12) Exercise can also help you lose weight.
(D)
(13) Set times for going to bed and getting up each day, and stick to them.
(14) Don’t watch TV or use a computer late at night, since these stimulate
visual response and interfere with sleep. (15) If you find you still can’t sleep,
get up and do something.
1. Which revision would improve the effectiveness of the article?
Begin a new paragraph with
A. sentence 3
B. sentence 4
C. sentence 5
D. sentence 6
2. Which sentence would be most effective if inserted at the beginning of
paragraph B?
A. Some high school students get better grades than others.
B. High-achieving students get more sleep.
C. Lack of sleep interferes with mathematical ability.
D. People need more sleep than they used to.

3. A study of high school students showed that students with low grades went
to bed 40 minutes later and got 25 minutes less sleep than students with
high
another study shows that when one gets fewer than six
to eight hours of sleep, it is harder to learn new skills.
A. grades. Similarly,
B. grades, likewise,
C. grades. As a result,
D. grades. Therefore,
4. Exercise can also help you lose weight.
Which revision should be made to the placement of sentence 12?
A. move sentence 12 to follow sentence 10
B. move sentence 12 to follow sentence 13
C. move sentence 12 to follow sentence 14
D. remove sentence 12
5. Which revision would improve the effectiveness of the article?
A. join paragraphs B and C
B. move sentence 10 to the end of
paragraph B
C. remove sentence 13
D. join paragraphs C and D
Questions 6 through 10 refer to the following paragraphs.
Getting Out Those Troublesome Stains
(A)
(1) Have you ever ruined a nice piece of clothing by staining it? (2) If so,
the following information on stain removal may interest you. (3) By learning
a few simple rules and keeping some household cleaners on hand, you can
preserve your clothing. (4) First of all, the faster you act, the better. (5) With

time, the stain will set. (6) Be sure to blot the stain rather than scrub it. (7)
Scrubbing can actually drive the stain into the fabric.
(B)
(8) Use hot water on a grease stain such as salad dressing and cold water
on a water-based stain such as wine, pasta sauce, or blood. (9) If you don’t
know what the stain is or where it came from, use room-temperature water.
(10) Otherwise you might set the stain.
(C)
(11) Sometimes other liquids are more effective than water. (12) Lemon
ink, rust, and iodine. (13) White vinegar takes out alcohol,
coffee, deodorants, and glue. (14) Liquid shampoo can be used on oil, tar,
and grease. (15) Not surprisingly, it works the same way on an oil stain as it
does on oil in your hair. (16) Rubbing alcohol removes stains from grass and
soft drinks.
(D)
(17) If you find that a stain is not going away or is getting worse, stop and
take your clothes to a dry cleaner. (18) Professionals know best. (19) Home
remedies may not work on every stain.
6. Which revision would improve the effectiveness of the article?
Begin a new paragraph with
A. sentence 3
B. sentence 4
C. sentence 5
D. sentence 6
7. Which sentence would be most effective if inserted at the beginning of
paragraph B?
A. Hot and cold water have many uses.

B. Choose the right water temperature for cleaning each stain.
C. Hot water takes out tough stains.
D. The second step is to determine the proper use of hot water.
8. Lemon

ink, rust, and iodine.

A. juice, for example removes
B. juice, for example. Removes
C. juice for example removes
D. juice, for example, removes
9. Which revision would improve the effectiveness of paragraph C?
A. move sentence 11 to follow sentence 12
B. move sentence 12 to follow sentence 14
C. remove sentence 14
D. remove sentence 15
10. Home remedies may not work on every stain.
Which revision should be made to the placement of sentence 19?
A. move sentence 19 to the beginning of paragraph C
B. move sentence 19 to follow sentence 13
C. move sentence 19 to the beginning of
paragraph D
D. move sentence 19 to follow sentence 17
Questions 11 through 14 refer to the following memo.
To: All Employees
From: Denise Ellis, Benefits Manager
(A)
(1) Starting on January 1, Allcity will no longer be our insurance carrier.
(2) Instead, you will have a choice of two other insurance

carriers: HealthPlan and Rainbow Insurance Company.
(B)
(3) HealthPlan is an HMO. (4) You will not have to pay any money to
doctors in advance with this plan, but you must go to doctors listed with the
insurance company. (5) HMOs are becoming increasingly popular. (6) With
Rainbow Insurance, you may choose any doctor you wish. (7)
you receive the service. (8) Afterwards, you submit the receipts to Rainbow
Insurance. (9) Representatives of both companies will be here on December 2
to discuss the details of their plans. (10) Please sign up for an informational
session on that day. (11) The sign-up sheet is on the door of the conference
room, where the meetings will take place.
(C)
(12) At the meeting, you will receive a card on which you must indicate
your choice of company. (13) Please mark your choice in the appropriate box
and submit it to me by December 5.
(D)
(14) If you do not submit your card in time, you may not be insured for the
month of January. (15) If you are not able to attend any of the informational
sessions, please let me know right away. (16) Feel free to contact me at ext.
2453 with any questions you may have about this process.
11. Which revision would improve the effectiveness of paragraph B?
A. remove sentence 3
B. move sentence 5 to the beginning of
paragraph B
C. remove sentence 5
D. remove sentence 10
12.

you receive the service.
A. However, you must pay the health providers when

B. However you must pay, the health providers when
C. However you must pay the health providers when,
D. However you must pay the health providers, when
13. Which revision would improve the effectiveness of the memo?
Begin a new paragraph with
A. sentence 7
B. sentence 8
C. sentence 9
D. sentence 10
14. If you do not submit your card on time, you may not be insured for the
month of January.
Which revision should be made to the placement of sentence 14?
A. move sentence 14 to the end of
paragraph C
B. move sentence 14 to follow sentence 15
C. move sentence 14 to follow sentence 16
D. remove sentence 14
Questions 15 through 19 refer to the following paragraphs.
Repairing a Flat Bicycle Tire
(A)
(1) The first step in fixing a flat bicycle tire is to remove the wheel. (2)
Next, release the brake. (3) Before you begin, let out any air in the tire. (4) If
you are removing the back wheel, put the derailleur in high gear. (5) Then
take off the axle nuts by unscrewing counterclockwise. (6) If your bike has
safety washers, remove these also. (7) Then remove the wheel.
(B)

(8) Remove the tire, and mark the valve stem position on it. (9) If possible,
remove the tire without using tools, because the inner tube punctures easily.
(10) Use tire levers or the backs of forks and spoons if necessary. (11) When
you find the leak, scrape the spot with sandpaper. (12) Remove the inner tube
and inflate it, listening and feeling for air leaks. (13) Then apply cement to
the tube, and let it dry completely before putting the patch on.
(C)
(14) First, inflate the tube and make sure the leak has been fixed. (15)
Next, slip the inner tube back into the tire, and put the tire back on the rim.
(16) Then inflate the tube to the correct pressure. (17) The pressure is right
when there is enough air to steady the tire but not so much air that the tire
cannot be squeezed between the brake pads.
(D)
(18) Put the bike back on its wheels, and then tighten the wheel nuts. (19)
ready to ride!
15. Which revision would improve the effectiveness of paragraph A?
A. move sentence 2 to follow sentence 3
B. begin a new paragraph with sentence 5
C. move sentence 5 to follow sentence 7
D. remove sentence 6
16. Which revision would improve the effectiveness of paragraph B?
A. move sentence 11 to follow sentence 8
B. move sentence 11 to follow sentence 9
C. move sentence 11 to follow sentence 12
D. move sentence 11 to follow sentence 13
17. Which sentence would be most effective if inserted at the beginning of
paragraph C?
A. All you have to do now is take care of the tire pressure.

B. Fixing a flat tire is a long process that
requires a lot of patience.
C. The next step is to put the tire and tube back onto the rim.
D. Patching the leak properly is also very
important.
18. Which sentence would be most effective if inserted at the beginning of
paragraph D?
A. The final step is to reinstall the wheel.
B. Fixing a flat tire requires careful planning.
C. Whether you are an experienced cyclist or just a beginner, you can fix
a flat tire.
D. Try not to use sharp tools to fix a flat tire.
19.

ready to ride!
A. Then readjust the tire pressure, and you’re
B. Moreover, readjust the tire pressure, and you’re
C. Moreover, readjusting the tire pressure, you’re
D. Also, having readjusted the tire pressure, you will be

Answers and explanations start on page 654.

CHAPTER 6

Writing About Text
Lesson 1: Unpack the Writing Prompt
The writing activity on the GED® Reasoning through Language Arts Test is
called an Extended Response. This task involves reading one passage or two
paired passages and producing a piece of writing in a word-processing box on
the computer screen. Page 58 shows how the reading and writing formats will
look on the computer.

Key Ideas
The Extended Response will require reading one or two passages and
writing a response to a prompt.
To draft an acceptable response to the text, the first step is to
“unpack” the prompt—to focus on the specific question you need to
address.
Your response must be evidence based, which means that it needs to
be grounded in facts, details, and examples from the text.

To master this assignment, you need to understand the purpose of evidence-

based writing. This type of writing requires that you develop an argument by
using evidence from the text(s) to support your claim.
On pages 86–93, you looked at writers’ arguments as a reading activity
alone. On the Extended Response activity, you will look at them in order to
develop your own argument and supporting text in response to the writing
prompt, or assignment.
Below are two arguments that you read on page 92. On the facing page is
awriting prompt based on them. While these readings are much shorter than
the ones on the Reasoning through Language Arts Test, they give a good
starting point for understanding how to unpack the writing prompt.
What does it mean to “unpack” a prompt? When you unpack a suitcase, you
take things out and think about what you are going to do with them—wash
them, fold them, hang them up, or put them in a drawer. Similarly, with a
writing prompt, you will take it apart in your mind and plan how you are
going to accomplish the task.

GED® TEST TIP
It is advisable to read the prompt before you read the passages.
That will help you to focus on the argument and the supporting
evidence in the passage or passages.
Reread the selections and the writing prompt on the facing page. Then
practice unpacking the writing prompt by answering the questions numbered
1–6 and reading the explanation below.
Passage A
Coal, the source of half the energy in the United States, has been the
dirtiest of all fossil fuels because it creates harmful emissions when
burned. Help is on the way with the development of new “clean coal”
technologies that reduce coal’s environmental impact. These new

technologies that purify exhaust gases as coal burns (wet scrubbers)
and prevent the formation of harmful emissions in the first place (lowNOx burners). There is even gasification, which avoids burning coal
altogether.
Passage B
“Clean coal” amounts to just an advertising slogan. Don’t be fooled
by claims about new technologies making coal a clean-burning fuel.
The hazards to our environment start well before that. Coal mining
wastes huge amounts of water—70 to 260 million gallons daily.
Today’s mining companies now use moun-taintop removal, instead of
traditional mining, to extract coal. Forty-nine states have issued fish
intake advisories due to high mercury concen-tration in water, much
of it due to runoff from coal mining.

Coal Writing Prompt
While the writer of Passage A proposes the benefits of clean coal, the
writer of Passage B identifies drawbacks to this position.
In your response, analyze both selections to determine which position is
better supported.
Use relevant and specific information from both selections to support
your response.
Type your response in the box. This task will take 45 minutes to
complete.

Unpacking the Writing Prompt
1. What is the writing assignment about?
2. What does the prompt ask you to do? Turn it into a question.

3. What are you being asked to include in your response?
4. Are you being asked for your opinion on the topic?
5. Are you being asked to take a position about the writers’ arguments?
6. Where are you writing? How long do you have?
1. The writing assignment is about the two selections that take different
positions on clean coal.
2. The prompt asks me: Which of the positions about clean coal is better
supported?
3. The prompt states that I have to use both relevant and specific
information from the passage.
4. No. I am not being asked for my opinion about clean coal.
5. Yes. I am being asked to take a position about which writer I think made
a stronger case.
6. I am to type in the box on the computer screen. I will have 45 minutes
for the entire writing task.

Practice 1
Questions 1 through 4 refer to the following writing
prompt. (For this practice, there are no passages.)

Writing Prompt
Passage A cites Federal Communications Commission determinations
and scientific studies that have concluded that radiation from cell phones
has no adverse effects. However, Passage B cites studies that raise
questions about traffic safety issues and the long-term health effects of

cell phone use.
In your response, compare and analyze both selections to determine
whether you agree with the writer of Passage A or Passage B. Use
relevant and specific information from both selections to support your
response.

Unpacking the Writing Prompt
1. What is the topic of the writing prompt?
____________________________________________
2. What does the prompt ask you to do? (Put this in the form of a question.)
____________________________________________
3. What are you asked to include in your response?
____________________________________________
4. Are you being asked for your opinion on the topic or to take a position on
the writers’ arguments?
____________________________________________
Answers and explanations start on page 654.

Lesson 2: Identify a Writer’s Arguments
and Assumptions
Key Ideas
Your response to the writing assignment will be based on identifying
a writer’s argument.
A writer’s argument is a conclusion, which is supported by facts,
details, and other evidence.

While a writer may not directly state them, he or she has assumptions
about the topic.

On the Reasoning through Language Arts Test, you will be writing a
response based on one or two passages. On page 86 you read that a written
argument consists of the following:
A statement, which is a conclusion about something
The evidence, which is support that is given for the argument
The premises, or the assumptions, behind the argument
Read a short passage. Identify the writer’s conclusion about the topic and the
assumptions behind it.
Secondhand smoke is the smoke that comes either from the lighted
end of a cigarette, pipe, or cigar or from the exhalation of a smoker.
Most people consider secondhand smoke to be less dangerous than
the nicotine that a cigarette user intakes. However, the particles that
come from the smoke of the lighted end of a cigarette, called
sidestream smoke, contain higher concentrations of carcinogens,
which are chemicals that cause cancer. These particles can be
breathed in easily by people around smokers, especially in enclosed
areas. Therefore, all restaurants should ban smoking inside.
1. What is the writer’s topic?
(1) secondhand smoke and its effects
(2) the most common carcinogens
2. What is the writer’s conclusion about the topic?
(1) Sidestream smoke contains high concentrations of carcinogens.
(2) Smoking should be banned inside restaurants.
3. Which of the following is the writer’s unstated assumption?
(1) Carcinogens only come from sidestream smoke.
(2) Restaurants should take steps to protect the health of their patrons.

GED® TEST TIP
When you are reading the passages for the extended-response
questions, ask yourself: "What is the writer’s conclusion?"
In question 1, choice (1) is correct. The writer focuses on secondhand smoke
throughout. In question 2, choice (2) is correct. The writer uses the information about secondhand smoke as support for the claim that smoking should be
banned inside restaurants. In question 3, choice (2) is correct. The writer
mentions that cancer-causing carcinogens can be breathed in easily in
enclosed areas as the premise for how smoking indoors can be dangerous to
others.

Practice 2
Directions: For each passage, answer the questions
about topic, conclusions, and assumptions.
Passage 1
Some U.S. representatives advocate a bill requiring all young people to
perform two years of military service by the age of 25. Proponents of the bill
argue that this will not only prepare the U.S. military for any potential threat
from other nations but will also build a greater spirit of patriotism among
U.S. citizens. Citizens will be able to appreciate the service of the military
and acquire a deeper respect toward honoring their country. However,
making service a requirement for all citizens will have the opposite effect;
people will feel burdened and resentful toward their government. Instead of
focusing on increasing participation in the military, the government should
more heavily promote volunteer programs to encourage citizens to help the
poor or marginalized within their communities.
Passage 2

To best protect children from being subjected to portrayals of violence, we
must reduce the amount of violence that is
present in video games. Numerous studies done by various groups show a
positive correlation between video game
usage and violence.
Many people consider violence in video games a recent trend, but one of the
earliest and most controversial video games was Death Race, released in
1976. In this game, the players controlled cars that ran over gremlins. The
game was later pulled from stores due to public outcry. With the successful
protest against Death Race as a model, we should be as proactive now to
reduce or eliminate violence in video games.
1. What is the writer’s topic?
___________________________________________________
______________________________________________________
2. What is the writer’s conclusion about the topic?
___________________________________________________
______________________________________________________
3. What is the writer’s unstated assumption about the topic?
___________________________________________________
______________________________________________________
4. What is the writer’s topic?
______________________________________________________
5. What is the writer’s conclusion about the topic?
___________________________________________________
___________________________________________________
___________________________________________________
6. What is the writer’s unstated assumption about the topic?
___________________________________________________
___________________________________________________

Answers and explanations start on page 654.

Lesson 3: Develop a Thesis Statement
You have been reading and analyzing writers’ arguments. Now it is your turn
to develop a response to what writers have to say.

Key Ideas
A thesis statement makes a claim and indicates that the passage will
support the claim with specific and relevant information.
A thesis statement differs from an opinion, which is a feeling or
belief about the topic of the passage.
A thesis statement is strengthened if it confronts any problems in a
passage.

Once you have unpacked the prompt and read the reading passages, you will
construct a thesis statement for your writing. This is your central argument.
It differs from an opinion because it makes a claim that you will defend with
evidence from the text.
A thesis statement does the following:
makes your argument clear
provides the reader with a road map of what you will be discussing
▶ Compare these two statements about the clean coal selections from page
146. Label the thesis statement with TS and the opinion with O.
____ I think that Passage A is better than Passage B because it does a good
job of explaining the new technologies and reminds us that coal is
responsible for half of our electricity.
____ I think that Passage B makes a better argument because it backs up
its conclusion with information about overuse of water, mountaintop
removal, and potential mercury poisoning.

GED® TEST TIP
Although writers have different approaches, it is best to
introduce your extended response with your thesis statement.
This will let a reader know your position right away. Also,
come back to your thesis statement as you write. This will keep
you on track.
The first statement should have O for opinion next to it because it is an
assertion without any support. It is subjective—in that it tells what the reader
likes, not what ideas the passage presents. It also repeats the irrelevant point
—that half of our electricity depends on coal. While that may be factually
true, it is off-topic when discussing whether or not coal can be a clean source
of energy.
The second statement should have TS next to it because it meets the criteria
for a thesis statement: it makes a claim and demonstrates that the writing that
follows will discuss specific and relevant support for the claim.
Keep in mind that your conclusion may need to recognize a limitation or a
problem. That problem may be contained in the passage writer’s unstated
assumption. For Passage B on page 146, the writer has already decided that
the notion of clean coal is deceptive. You may strengthen your thesis
statement by acknowledging and dealing with a problem.
Even though the writer of Passage B is biased against the idea of
clean coal, I believe that he makes the stronger argument. He backs
up his conclusions with specific information about the environmental
impact of today’s coal-mining processes.

Practice 3
Directions: Read each paragraph. Write a thesis statement for a possible

response to each.
ADVERTISING FOR PRESCRIPTION DRUGS ON TV
Sit down to enjoy any television show today, and you’ll find that almost
every other commercial seems to be pushing a prescription drug. Although
this form of direct-to-consumer (DTC) advertising of prescription medication
has become commonplace in American programming, it remains a relatively
new development in the medical world. In fact, the practice is currently legal
in only two countries, the United States and New Zealand. Patient advocates
and those who wish to maintain high standards of healthcare argue that DTC
advertising should be eliminated altogether. Advertising prescription
medications on television creates a popular demand for the drugs, and it may
lead individuals to pressure their health-care providers for treatments that are
inappropriate or even dangerous. At the same time, because prescription
commercials must name all potential side effects of a certain medication, the
ads may frighten other individuals away from using drugs that are both safe
and effective for the general public. While such DTC advertisements serve to
increase the profits of drug companies, they do little to ensure that the public
is better educated about its health-care choices.
1. What is the writer’s argument about prescription drug advertising on TV?
___________________
______________________________________________
2. Write a thesis statement in response to the argument. State your position
and indicate how you will support it.
______________________________________________
______________________________________________
______________________________________________
MANY AMERICANS DON’T SPEAK A SECOND LANGUAGE
In an era in which people from different continents can connect in seconds by

phone, email, or videochat, there is a growing demand for individuals who
can speak multiple languages. Additionally, rapid immigration, particularly
(in recent years) from Spanish- and Chinese-speaking countries, has ensured
that America’s population becomes more multilingual every day. Despite
this, the majority of Americans are still fluent in American English only and
know just a few key phrases of another language for polite but limited
exchanges. With almost 18 percent of the country’s population citing
languages other than English as their primary tongues, many Americans
recognize that their inability to speak a foreign language fluently places them
at a disadvantage. Particularly in the fields of technology, business,
education, and medicine, those who can competently communicate in the
native languages of their peers, clients, students, or patients, respectively, will
be better equipped to find common ground, work collaboratively, make
advances, and build deeper relationships. To remain competitive both at
home and internationally, Americans must make foreign language fluency the
keystone of a well-rounded education.
3. What is the writer’s argument about Americans not knowing a second
language?
______________________________________________
______________________________________________
4. Write a thesis statement in response to the argument. State your position
and indicate how you will support it.
______________________________________________
______________________________________________
______________________________________________
Answers and sample thesis statements start on page 654.

Lesson 4: Collect Supporting Evidence

Key Ideas
Formulate your thesis statement and collect supporting evidence
while you read by using the tools provided.
Gather supporting evidence that is specific and ties back to your
thesis statement.
Avoid facts that are interesting but not relevant to your central
argument.

Once you have formulated your thesis statement, you need to use evidence
from the passage or passages to support your claim. You should preview the
prompt before you read the passage or passages. That benefit of this strategy
is that you can:
formulate your thesis statement while you are reading
gather specific and relevant evidence to support your thesis
How can you gather information while you are reading? The computer-based
GED® Test provides you with two essential tools for gathering evidence:
an online highlighter that you can use to mark specific facts and
examples to use in your response
an offline write-on board and erasable marker that you can use to
write your thesis statement and to take notes as you read

Thesis statement: Family time is a thing of the past because too many
distractions interfere with conversation and other interactions.

Practice gathering evidence with the passage below. Circle specific pieces of
evidence that support the thesis statement above.
I know it sounds corny, but I miss the way my family was together

when I was growing up. Even though Mom and Dad worked, we
usually had breakfast together. Now, I work the night shift and sleep
in the morning, while my husband is too harried with getting the kids
to eat and making their lunches to get a preview of their day.
After school, our kids have part-time jobs, and everyone gets home at
different times. Even though I have dinner ready before I leave at 8:00
p.m., someone is doing homework, someone is on the Internet, and
someone is texting friends that he or she saw an hour before. I can’t
remember the last time we all ate together and had a conversation.
Even when I try to organize a movie night, it seems that one of us has
social or work obligations. We all love each other, but it is hard to
have what we can call family time. Thank goodness for holidays and
vacations when we can slow down and enjoy each other.

GED® TEST TIP
When you cite the writer’s evidence, use phrases such as “The
passage stated . . .”; “In the text . . .”; and “One example from
the text is . . .”
Evidence statements that support the thesis statement:
Breakfast time is hectic and one parent is asleep.
After school, people are working or engaged in distractions.
Family members don’t eat dinner together.
Not everyone is available for common activities, like movie night.

Practice 4
Directions: Read the prompt, the reading selection, and the writer’s
conclusion. List three pieces of supporting evidence from the passage
that you could use in a response to the prompt. Add one piece of
supporting evidence from your own experience or observations. You will

not be writing a response to this prompt.

Drinking Age Prompt
The writer of this passage has a position on keeping the minimum legal
drinking age at 21. Take a position in response to the writer’s argument,
using relevant and specific information from the selection to support
your response.

The Case for Keeping the Minimum Drinking Age at 21
We owe it to young adults, teens, and children to keep the minimum drinking
age right where it is: at 21. The dangers of alcohol are often overlooked due
to the fact that it is not a prohibited substance, but make no mistake: it is
eminently dangerous, particularly to our youth.
In larger doses—consistent with binge drinking— alcohol wreaks havoc on
the sensitive chemistry of the brain. The feast-and-famine pattern of drinking
that is typical of teenage drinkers can lead to permanent damage to the
prefrontal cortex, the part of the brain responsible for planning and decisions.
Since this portion of the brain continues to develop later in life, younger
brains are particu-larly vulnerable to the effects of alcohol. Even in moderate
doses, it causes long-term damage to the heart, the liver, and the stomach.
Proponents of a lower drinking age maintain that the allure of the taboo of
alcohol encourages abuse among youth. The United Kingdom, however, has
a long history of social drinking, and the legal drinking age is 18 in bars and
16 in restaurants; despite this, alcohol-related deaths had doubled in the U.K.
in the decade before 2008. Indeed, a 2008 BBC documentary ranked alcohol
as the fifth most dangerous drug in the U.K., ahead of speed, LSD, ecstasy,
and cannabis.
As a nation, we recognized the dangers that alcohol represented to our
citizens and communities when we united to pass a constitutional amendment
against it a century ago. That experiment was abandoned only due to

challenges of enforcement, but Al Capone could never have built a crime
empire on the dimes of 18- to 20-year-olds alone. We owe it to our youth—
and the future of our nation—to protect their brains and their lives.
Writer’s Conclusion
The conclusion is that despite some reasons for lowering the legal drinking
age, it should remain at 21.
1. Three pieces of evidence used in the passage to support this conclusion are
...
a. The passage states that ___________
______________________________________________
______________________________________________
b. Another fact from the passage is
______________________________________________
______________________________________________
c. In support of this position, the text further says that
________________________
______________________________________________
______________________________________________
2. I (agree/disagree) with the position of this piece.
3. One piece of personal evidence I would use to support my position is
________________
______________________________________________
______________________________________________
______________________________________________
______________________________________________

Answers begin on page 655.

Lesson 5: Plan Your Response
Key Ideas
Take ten minutes to unpack the prompt, read the passage(s), and plan
your response.
As you read the passages, develop your thesis statement and collect
supporting evidence with the online highlighter or by taking notes.
Plan your response by either outlining or mapping the key ideas that
you will use in the response.

You will have 45 minutes to complete the Extended Response activity. An
online clock at the top of your screen will let you know how much time you
have left. Check it as you work through your response. You want to use that
time wisely, and the best thing you can do is to take 10 minutes for
prewriting, or planning, what you are going to write.
Successful test takers do this type of planning. It ensures that you understand
the prompt, write a thesis statement, gather the relevant evidence, and have
your ideas in place before you begin to write.

Extended Response Strategy
This Extended Response Strategy will maximize your ability to use the 45
minutes efficiently and effectively. As you work through the rest of this unit,
practice managing each stage of the strategy.

GED® TEST TIP
Follow through on all of the planning steps before you write.
You will have plenty of time to execute your plan, and your
score will be higher if you have thought your response through
and mapped it out.

Prewriting Strategies
Two of the most useful prewriting strategies for any kind of writing,
including evidence-based writing, are outlining and mapping. Look at both
methods of grouping ideas based on the same thesis statement.

Thesis statement: People need both close friends and acquaintances
because they meet our social needs in different ways.

An outline depicts each main topic by using a system of numbers and letters
stressing a logical progression of ideas. Here is an outline based on the thesis
statement above.
I. Benefits of close friends
a. Will always be there for you
b. Can always be yourself with them
c. Can have intimate conversations that are satisfying but confidential
d. Stand the test of time

II. Benefits of acquaintances
a. Add variety to your life
b. Expand your world
III. Acquaintances fulfill some special needs
a. Social needs—if you can’t see closest friends every day
b. Networking needs—when you need to search for a job, find a new
day care provider, etc.
c. Can make a party or other social event more interesting
An idea map uses a drawing to visually group ideas. To make a map, write
your main idea in the center. Then draw lines from there to your main topics.
From there, you attach the supporting ideas.

Practice 5
Directions: Follow these steps to plan a response. You should allow 10
minutes for this task.
Read the writing prompt to understand your task.
Read the passage. Think about your thesis statement. Underline and take

notes on key points that you will want to summarize or respond to.
Write a thesis statement based on responding to the prompt and the
passage.
Make an outline and an idea map based on the selection.

Family Pets Writing Prompt
The writer of this passage explains the reasons a family should not own
a pet. Read the selection and take a stand for or against the author’s
viewpoint, using relevant and specific information from the selection to
support your response.

When you are trying to decide whether or not to buy a household pet, you
need to weigh the pros and cons of doing so. Your children will make
heartfelt pleas for an animal and will make wild claims about what they will
do to help. However, the negative reasons outweigh the positive ones in
terms of time, money, and inconvenience.
One major disadvantage is that you simply will have more household chores.
You will need to take the pet on walks or clean out a box, cage, or fish bowl.
Trust me. I’ve done them all. You will have to buy food regularly, sometimes
even specialty food for particular pets or aging or sick animals. Finally,
ongoing cleanup is needed for animals that shed fur, feathers, or skin.
There are other inconveniences as well for you and your family. You need
specialized knowledge to care properly for the pet’s health and safety. You
will make more trips to the vet than you do to the doctor’s office. This gets
expensive. It can be time-consuming and expensive to go away for a weekend or a vacation, unless you have a cousin or a friend who owes you a favor.
Owning a pet may also create unexpected problems for family and friends.
Some people are allergic to animals and might suffer an adverse reaction
when they come to your home. Also, if a new baby arrives in the house, the
animal may express its jealousy in unwelcome ways.

I do have to recognize the positive side of having a pet. Animals can be great
companions and return your love unconditionally. They can provide security
(or at least a sense of security). Also, that walking I belittled at the outset can
actually be good exercise. Finally, I have to admit that with all of the work
involved, caring for an animal is still less work than taking care of a child.
On balance, I think the wisest course of action for a family is to forgo the
joys of pet ownership. The children will get over their discontent and find
something else that fires their interest. The time and money saved can be put
to different uses, which hopefully will give you satisfaction and
companionship as well.
1. Thesis Statement According to the prompt, you are to take a position in
agreement or disagreement with the writer of “Family Pets.” Decide what
you think and write your thesis statement below.
I. I think that the writer’s position on owning a family pet is
_____________________
because _____________________________________________
________________________________________________________
Then, on Test Day, either write an outline or make an idea map. Practice
both approaches on this page.
2. Outline Write an outline, using this as a model. Keep your outline; you
will use it in Lesson 6.
Also address related reasoning issues, either by stating and contradicting
the counterargument (main argument against your position) and/or by
addressing the writer’s faulty reasoning (if any).
I. Thesis statement
II. Main supporting reason related to the text
III. Another supporting reason related to the text
IV. Another supporting reason related to the text
V. Related arguments
A. Counterargument

i. Argument against my position
ii. My rejection of the counterargument, with example
B. Writer’s faulty reasoning (if any)
i. Why the writer’s reasoning is faulty
ii. Supporting example
3. Idea Map Make a map of your response to the passage. Use facts and
evidence from the passage as well as your own ideas. Draw it on a sheet
of paper. Keep your map; you will use it in Lesson 6.

4. Reflect Which way worked better for you—outline or map? Practice both
until you find the method that will work best for you on the test.
Sample responses start on page 655.

Lesson 6: Draft Your Response
You have practiced the first part of the Extended Response Strategy:
Planning. Once you have planned your writing, the next stage is to draft
your response. You should take about 25 minutes to do the following:
Use your thesis statement to introduce your argument and how you
intend to support it.
Use your plan to write the body of your response, citing specific
evidence from the text to support your ideas.

Provide additional relevant information based on your own
knowledge and perspective.
Consistently check back with your thesis statement to make sure that
you are staying on track.
Write a closing that summarizes your position or restates the thesis
statement in another way.

Key Ideas
Take 25 minutes to draft your response.
Use your thesis statement to begin your introductory paragraph and to
keep you focused as you write.
Write several body paragraphs based on the facts, details, and
evidence in your outline or idea map.
Wrap up the response with a concluding paragraph that reinforces
your thesis.

Review the planning on page 155 for writing on the topic of close friends and
acquaintances. See how that planning was used to draft the writing below.
(Note that an underlined topic sentence introduces each paragraph.)
An introduction lays out your argument and how you will support it:
People need both close friends and acquaintances because they meet
our social needs in different ways. The special bond a person has with
close friends can’t be replicated. However, there are important needs
that acquaintances can fulfill, and, in their own way, these needs are
just as important as those met by the closest of friends.
Body paragraphs (you will need more than one) elaborate on your support
with evidence, details, facts, and related personal examples.

GED® TEST TIP

One key to a good score on the Extended Response is to cite
specific evidence from the reading passage(s). This is called an
“evidence-based” writing activity because you are expected to
base your response on evidence from the texts.
Close friendships certainly have numerous benefits. For one thing,
loyal friends are always there to support each other, no matter what. A
big bonus is that we can just be ourselves with close friends. There is
no pressure to impress or entertain someone who accepts us for who
we are. Some friendships last years, becoming deeper and more
meaningful with time. For example, even though I am now 35, my
best friend from high school and I are still in touch, sharing stories
about our two-year-old boys.
A closing paragraph restates your main point to reinforce it.
So while it is important to have close friends, it is really rewarding to
have a wide circle of acquaintances as well. Even though the quality
of the relationship may not be as deep, these people broaden our lives,
experiences, and networks to enrich our experiences and help us to
grow.

Practice 6.1
Part A: Introduction
Directions: Practice writing an introduction based on the prompt and
passage from page 156 and your planning from page 157. Write your
introduction on a computer if possible. Save the file as Family Pets
Introduction. If it is not possible to write it on a computer, compose your
introduction neatly on paper so that you can revise it later.

Family Pets Writing Prompt

The writer of this passage explains the reasons a family should not own
a pet. Read the selection and take a stand for or against the author’s
position, using relevant and specific information from the selection to
support your response.

Begin with a topic sentence that summarizes your thesis statement from
page 157.
Support your topic sentence with either
a preview of the main points you will be covering based on your
outline or idea map; or
an example, description, or personal story—tied to the thesis
statement—that will interest the reader.
Part B: Concluding Statement
Directions: Practice writing a concluding statement based on the prompt
above and your planning from page 157. Write your conclusion on a
computer if possible. Save the file as Family Pets Conclusion. If writing it
on a computer is not possible, compose the concluding statement neatly
on paper.
Restate your thesis statement from page 157 in different words. (Don’t
just repeat what your reader has already read.)
Make a statement that answers the question “So what?” Give your
reader a reason to care about your argument.
Don’t introduce new arguments but leave the reader with something to
think about that wraps up the paper.
Sample responses start on page 656.

Practice 6.2
Directions: Plan and draft an extended response to the prompt below
and the passage on the facing page. Write your response on a computer
if possible. If you cannot, write neatly on paper so that you can revise it

later.
Step 1—Plan: Take 10 minutes to read the prompt and the passage. Under
the prompt, make an outline or draw an idea map to organize the following:
your thesis statement
your main points and supporting evidence from the passage
counterarguments and your response or faulty reasoning in the passage
Step 2—Draft: Take 25 minutes to draft your response, which will include
the following:
an introductory statement with your thesis statement as the topic
sentence
body paragraphs, with your reasons accompanied by supporting
evidence from the text
use phrases such as “As the writer says . . . ,” “The information in
the passage states . . . ,” “This is supported in the passage by . . .”
a concluding statement wrapping up the piece
It would be best to write the response on a computer. If that is not possible,
write it out on a piece of paper. Save your response, since you will be
revising and editing it in Lesson 7.

Cell Phone Writing Prompt
The passage addresses controversy about cell phone use. The Federal
Communications Commission has determined that radiation from cell
phones has no adverse effects. However, some studies raise questions
about traffic safety issues and the long-term health effects of cell phone
use.
In your response, compare the arguments in the reading selection and
take a position on cell phone safety. Use relevant and specific
information to support your response.

Cell Phones: Risky or Safe?
1 The Federal Communications Commission has determined that there is
not enough evidence to link cell phones to cancer. But that does not
mean cell phones are 100 percent safe. Many risks and unknowns are
connected to the use of mobile phones. You should be aware of those
risks and take steps to protect yourself.
2 Cell phones emit types of radiation that can penetrate several inches into
the brain. These types of radiation are not normally associated with
cancer, and most scientific studies show that frequent cell phone users
do not have an increased risk of tumors. But a few scientists claim to
have found a connection between mobile phones and a type of brain
cancer known as glioma. Even a small chance of brain cancer should
make you very nervous.
3 Also, that chance of cancer may increase in time. Mobile phones were
very rare before the late 1990s. If the risk of phone-related disease
increases sharply after 20 or 30 years of constant use, we might only find
out after millions of people get sick. It’s true that there is no increased
illness observed among people who have worked at radio towers for 30
years or more, but cell phones are held much closer to the body than
radio equipment is.
4 Finally, people who think their cell phones are completely safe may use
them even when doing so is not wise. Being able to contact emergency
services from anywhere is a major advantage of modern technology, but
being distracted by that technology can cause accidents. Calling or
texting while driving or operating machinery is dangerous, no matter
how “safe” a piece of equipment your phone may be.
5 Be cautious with your cell phone. You may find that you need it to
function in today’s modern society, but your health and well-being are
too important to risk through careless use of this technology. Do not
assume that today’s science proves that your phone is completely free of
danger.
The Extended Response Evaluation Guide appears on page 730.

Practice 6.3
Directions: Plan and draft an extended response to the prompt and the
paired passages on the facing page. Write your response on a computer,
if possible. If you cannot, write neatly on a sheet of paper so that you can
revise it later.
Step 1—Plan: Take 10 minutes to read the prompt below and the passages.
Take notes as you read, or underline evidence that you will want to use.
Make an outline or an idea map to organize:
your thesis statement
your main points and supporting evidence from the passages
counterarguments and your response or faulty reasoning in either of the
passages
Step 2—Draft: Take 25 minutes to draft your response with:
an introductory statement with your thesis statement as the topic
sentence
body paragraphs, with your reasons accompanied by supporting
evidence from the text
a concluding statement wrapping up the piece
It would be best to write the response on a computer. If that is not possible,
write it out on paper. Save your response, since you will be revising and
editing it in Lesson 7.

Gettysburg Address Writing Prompt
Abraham Lincoln’s Gettysburg Address is renowned as one of the most
significant speeches of all time. Delivered in the midst of a brutal civil
war, this address places that war in the context of U.S. history—past,
present, and future. However, it was not universally acclaimed at the
time, as shown by the excerpt from the Chicago Times newspaper.

Read both of the passages closely. Take a stand on which passage does a
better job of explaining the significance of the Battle of Gettysburg’s
casualties. There were a total of more than 45,000 casualties on both
sides, Union and Confederacy.
Use relevant and specific information from both passages to support
your response.

Abraham Lincoln’s Gettysburg Address
Fourscore and seven years ago our fathers brought forth on this continent a
new nation, conceived in liberty and dedicated to the proposition that all men
are created equal. Now we are engaged in a great civil war, testing whether
that nation or any nation so conceived and so dedicated can long endure. But
in a larger sense, we cannot dedicate, we cannot consecrate, we cannot
hallow this ground. The brave men, living and dead who struggled here have
consecrated it far above our poor power to add or detract. The world will
little note nor long remember what we say here, but it can never forget what
they did here. It is for us the living rather to be dedicated here to the
unfinished work which they who fought here have thus far so nobly
advanced. It is rather for us to be here dedicated to the great task remaining
before us—that from these honored dead we take increased devotion to that
cause for which they gave the last full measure of devotion—that we here
highly resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain, that this nation
under God shall have a new birth of freedom, and that government of the
people, by the people, for the people shall not perish from the earth.
—Abraham Lincoln, November 19, 1863
Critical Review of the Gettysburg Address
. . . The President’s exhibition . . . was an insult at least to the memories of a
part of the dead, whom he was there professedly to honor—in its
misstatement of the cause for which they died, it was a perversion of history
so flagrant that the most extended charity cannot regard it as otherwise than
willful. As a refutation. . . . we copy certain clauses in the Federal
constitution:

“Representatives and direct taxes shall be apportioned among the several
States which may be included in this Union, according to their respective
numbers, which shall be determined by adding to the whole number of free
persons, including those bound to service for a term of years, and excluding
Indians not taxed, three-fifths of all other persons.
“The migration or importation of such persons as any of the States now
existing shall think proper to admit shall not be prohibited by the Congress
prior to the year 1808, but a tax or duty may be imposed on such importation,
not exceeding ten dollars for each person. . . . No amendment to the
constitution, made prior to 1808, shall affect the preceding clause.
“No person held to service or labor in one State under the laws thereof,
escaping into another, shall, in consequence of any law or regulation therein,
be discharged from such service or labor, but shall be delivered up on claim
of the party to whom such service or labor may be due.”
Do these provisions in the constitution dedicate the nation to “the proposition
that all men are created equal”? Mr. Lincoln occupies his present position by
virtue of this constitution, and is sworn to the maintenance and enforcement
of these provisions. It was to uphold this constitution, and the Union created
by it, that our officers and soldiers gave their lives at Gettysburg. How dared
he, then, standing on their graves, misstate the cause for which they died, and
libel the statesmen who founded the government?
Excerpted from the Chicago Times, November 23, 1863

Lesson 7: Revise and Edit Your Response
Key Ideas
Take ten minutes to revise and edit your response.
Reread the response to improve the clarity of your arguments;
sufficiency of evidence from the text; and organization of sentences,

paragraphs, and the entire piece.
Use the delete, copy, and paste features on the computer to make
these revisions.

Revising Your Work
Once you have completed your draft, you need to revise. You should take
about five of the ten remaining minutes to read over your response and make
improvements by using the copy, delete, and paste functions on the computer.
Ask yourself:
Does the introductory paragraph contain the thesis statement and lay
out the main point of my response?
Does each paragraph have one main idea, begin with a topic sentence,
and support the thesis statement?
Is there specific and relevant supporting evidence from the text for
each main idea?
Have I assessed the validity of the arguments in the passages?
Is there a clear flow of ideas from one paragraph to the next, using
transitional words, phrases, and ideas?
Are there any irrelevant ideas or sentences that can be removed?
Are there any short, choppy sentences that could be combined?
Can I improve my word choice to be more specific or interesting?
Is there a concluding paragraph that restates and reinforces

GED® TEST TIP
When you practice revising before you take the test, read your
drafts out loud. This will help you to “hear” weaknesses in
your organization, sentence structure, and word choice.
Read the writing sample below and review the revisions that were made by

hand to improve the draft. Think about why each change was made.

Practice 7.1
A. Directions: Read the response below, and revise the problems in
sentence structure and organization. Try to complete your revisions
in five minutes, but use more time if needed.
Most of us are aware of the consequences of speeding, which range
from receiving a speeding ticket to getting into an accident. A quick
survey of any highway will show that many drivers exceed the speed
limit. Why do people speed? One common reason is that people do
not think they will suffer any consequences. If they have never been
stopped by the police or crashed their car, they don’t see any reason to
worry.
People simply need to get somewhere in a hurry. They realize that
they are speeding but they have such a need to arrive on time that they
don’t care. They’ve got ants in their pants. A final reason is lack of

respect for other drivers, one driver who is speeding makes road
conditions less safe for everyone. Drivers who act as though they are
in the Indy 500 they have no regard for the safety of others.
We know that people speed because of impatience and they don’t
fear the consequences. Another reason is no respect. Let’s figure out
what will make them stop.
B. Directions: Revise the response that you wrote on the topic from page
160, reprinted below. Time yourself. Try to complete the revision in
ten minutes. Save your work. You will use the response again.

Cell Phone Writing Prompt
The passage addresses controversy about cell phone use. The Federal
Communications Commission has determined that radiation from cell
phones has no adverse effects. However, some studies raise questions
about traffic safety issues and the long-term health effects of cell phone
use.
In your response, compare the arguments in the reading selection and
take a position on cell phone safety. Use relevant and specific
information to support your response.

C. Directions: After you check your answers to the exercise above,
complete the strategy box below. If you need more practice with
specific skills and concepts, review “Connecting Ideas” on pages 134–
145 and “Polishing Your Writing” on pages 172–181.

Answers and explanations start on page 656.

Editing Your Work
Once you’re satisfied with the organization and clarity of your essay, check
for other errors in sentence structure, as well as errors in grammar, usage, and
mechanics. To edit your response, take another five minutes to reread your
response, and ask yourself these questions:

Key Ideas
Edit your work to make sure there are no errors in sentence structure,
grammar, usage, or mechanics.
An editing checklist can help you find errors as you practice for the
Reasoning through Language Arts test.

Are all the sentences complete?
Are there any run-ons or comma splices that should be corrected?
Are all lists parallel in structure?
Are nouns and pronouns used correctly?
Are verb forms and tenses used correctly?
Does the subject of each sentence match the verb?
Is the punctuation correct?
Is capitalization used correctly?
Are all words correctly spelled?
Are there any inappropriate word choices?

GED® TEST TIP
There are no “spell check” or “grammar check” features on
the GED® Test. If you can, turn them off on your computer
while you practice writing your response. Then turn the
features back on when you review your work.
▶ Read the paragraph below, and notice how the errors were corrected.

Practice 7.2
A. Directions: Read the body of the writing sample. Correct errors in
sentence structure, grammar, usage, mechanics, and word choice. Try
to finish editing in five minutes, but use more time if needed.
One common reason for speeding is that people don’t think they
will suffer any consequences. If they have never been stopped by the
Police or crashed there car they don’t see any reason too worry.
Another reason is that people simply are needing to get somewhere
in a hurry. They realize that they are speeding, but they have such a
need to arrive on time that they dont care. There impatience get the
better of them.
A final reason is lack of respect for other drivers, one driver who is
speeding make road conditions less safe for everyone. Drivers who
act as though they are in the indy 500 got no regard for the safety of
others.
B. Directions: Edit the response that you wrote on the topic below, which
you saw on page 160. Time yourself and try to complete the edit in five
minutes.

Cell Phone Writing Prompt
The passage addresses controversy about cell phone use. The Federal
Communications Commission has determined that radiation from cell
phones has no adverse effects. However, some studies raise questions
about traffic safety issues and the long-term health effects of cell phone
use.
In your response, compare the arguments in the reading selection and
take a position on cell phone safety. Use relevant and specific
information to support your response.

C. Directions: After you check your answers to the exercise above, complete

the strategy box below. If you need more practice with specific skills and
concepts, review the sections in the book that correspond to these skills.

Answers and explanations start on page 656.

Writing About Text Practice
Part A
Directions: Plan and draft an extended response to the prompt below
and the passage that follows. Write your response on a computer if
possible. If you cannot, write neatly on paper so that you can revise it
later.
Step 1—Plan: Take 10 minutes to read the prompt and the passage. Under
the prompt, make an outline or draw an idea map to organize:
your thesis statement
your main points and supporting evidence from the passage
counterarguments and your response or faulty reasoning in the passage
Step 2—Draft: Take 25 minutes to draft your response, which will include
the following:
an introduction, with your thesis statement as the topic sentence
body paragraphs, with your reasons accompanied by supporting
evidence from the text
use phrases such as “As the writer says . . . ,” “The information in

the passage states . . . ,” “This is supported in the passage by . . .”
a concluding statement wrapping up the piece
Step 3—Revise and Edit: Take 10 minutes to reread your response to:
revise to improve organization, cohesion, and clarity of sentences,
paragraphs, and the entire piece
edit to correct errors in sentence structure, grammar, punctuation,
capitalization, and spelling

Social Networking on the Internet—Positive or Negative?
The passage addresses the serious impact that the explosion of social
networking has had on our lives. In recent years, social relations have
developed online that allow us to connect with friends or create
communities around common interests. Supporters feel that these
networks create greater interaction and increased information. Critics
say that this trend actually limits social interactions and creates shortand long-term risks for the users.
In your response, compare the arguments in the reading selection and
take a position favoring either the benefits or the drawbacks of social
networking. Use relevant and specific information to support your
response.

Social Networking on the Internet—Positive or Negative?
In a hundred years, humanity will look back and try to pinpoint the moment
in its history when it overcame the clumsy limits of flesh-and-blood
existence. When it does, Internet social networking will stand out as an
important change, not just in the ways in which we communicate with each
other but also, and perhaps more importantly, in the ways in which we
perceive ourselves.
At this primitive moment, our contacts on social networks are still people we

have met in person, for the most part. And there was a time when this was
natural: you have to choose your friends from the selection available to you.
But the menu has changed. The great promise of Internet socialization is that
congregation is no longer at the mercy of geography. If I join an online
community of checkers enthusiasts whose members are scattered across four
continents, our interactions will be little different than if we all lived in the
United States. Our shared interest, rather than where our bodies happen to
live, is what brings us together.
As our online friendships increasingly supplant our in-person friendships, our
online personalities begin to replace our old selves, too. What happens when
two-thirds of my acquaintances know me by an invented username rather
than by my real name, or by an animated icon of a dancing stickman rather
than by my face? The answer: I learn that I can essentially define myself for
this group of people. I can be exactly who I want to be.
With time, we will all come to shift to interest-based interactions almost
exclusively. If you’ve always felt alone because you’ve never been able to
find anyone who shares your greatest passion—and that passion happens to
be watching macramé competitions—then the Internet opens up a new world
of like-minded individuals to you. You’ll share experiences, pictures, and tips
and live as you never could have 30 years ago, when you would have been
forced to endure your isolation.
At the same time, we must ask ourselves: Is this something we want to
encourage? One of the great protective mechanisms of the flesh-and-blood
version of human communities is shame. As unfair as it may sound to
ridicule our poor macramé enthusiast, social disapproval is an important tool
for discouraging destructive behavior and extremism. When online
communities offer a meeting place for outcasts, the shunning of these
tendencies loses its force. It is no coincidence that online communities are the
single most fertile recruiting ground for terrorism. And isn’t accepting
differences in others—rather than surrounding ourselves with homogeneous
communities of like-minded friends—an important part of the human
experience?
For children of the 20th century, there is something else very alarming in the
idea of channeling so many of our interactions through the Internet. In the

heyday of the Soviet Union, a video camera in every home was presented as
the greatest tool a totalitarian state could wish for. If all my interactions pass
through the Internet, won’t the government be watching me? Regardless of
whether it will or won’t, it certainly seems now to have that option.
We also must wonder what will become of our most cherished traits as we
transition to an existence of ones and zeroes. As biological beings, we have
emotional needs tied to touch and warmth. None of my online friends can
give my dancing stickman a hug!
Ultimately, the new possibilities that the online world opens up to us are
irresistible and herald a new era of finely tuned communities with
unprecedented potential. The challenge will lie in making the most of this
new world without losing the vital elements of our nonelectronic human
experience.
Evaluation criteria is on page 730.
Part B
Directions: Develop an extended response to the prompt below and the
paired passages on the facing page. Write your response on a computer if
possible. If you cannot, write neatly on paper so that you can revise it
later.
Step 1—Plan: Take 10 minutes to read the prompt and the passages. Under
the prompt, make an outline or draw an idea map to organize:
your thesis statement
your main points and supporting evidence from the passage
counterarguments and your response or faulty reasoning in the passage
Step 2—Draft: Take 25 minutes to draft your response, which will include
the following:
an introductory statement, with your thesis statement as the topic
sentence
body paragraphs, with your reasons accompanied by supporting

evidence from the text
use phrases such as “As the writer says . . . ,” “The information in
the passage states . . . ,” “This is supported in the passage by . . .”
a concluding statement wrapping up the piece
Step 3—Revise and Edit: Take 10 minutes to reread your response and do the
following:
revise to improve organization, cohesion, and clarity of sentences,
paragraphs, and the entire piece
edit to correct errors in sentence structure, grammar, punctuation,
capitalization, and spelling

Health and Safety on the Job
The first passage presents regulations of the U.S. Occupational Safety
and Health Administration (OSHA). The second passage is a newspaper
article about workers who successfully sued their employer, claiming
that they were fired because they had reported injuries on the job.
Read both the OSHA regulations and the news report carefully. Take a
position on whether or not you think that the court decision was correct
based on the OSHA guidelines.
Use relevant and specific information from both passages to support
your response.

OSHA Standards and Worker Protection
OSHA standards are rules that describe the methods that employers must use
to protect their employees from hazards. There are OSHA standards for
Construction work, Agriculture, Maritime operations, and General Industry,
which are the standards that apply to most worksites. These standards limit
the amount of hazardous chemicals workers can be exposed to, require the
use of certain safe practices and equipment, and require employers to monitor

hazards and keep records of workplace injuries and illnesses. Examples of
OSHA standards include requirements to: provide fall protection, prevent
trenching cave ins, prevent some infectious diseases, assure that workers
safely enter confined spaces, prevent exposure to harmful substances like
asbestos, put guards on machines, provide respirators or other safety
equipment, and provide training for certain dangerous jobs.
You Cannot Be Punished or Discriminated Against for Using Your
OSHA Rights
The OSHA Act protects workers who complain to their employer, OSHA, or
other government agencies about unsafe or unhealthful working conditions in
the workplace or environmental problems. You cannot be transferred, denied
a raise, have your hours reduced, be fired, or punished in any other way
because you used any right given to you under the OSHA Act. Help is
available from OSHA for whistleblowers.
If you have been punished or discriminated against for using your rights, you
must file a complaint with OSHA within 30 days of the alleged reprisal for
most complaints.
Source: U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration

OSHA fines Norfolk Southern $802K for firing workers
The U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration announced
Monday that it was fining a Norfolk Southern Corp. subsidiary more
than $800,000 for firing three workers who had reported injuries on
the job.
OSHA, a division of the U.S. Department of Labor, ordered Norfolk
Southern Railway Co. to pay the former workers a total of $802,169
in damages. The agency also said the railroad company must clear the
workers’ disciplinary records and post workplace notices and offer
training on whistleblower rights.
“OSHA’s investigations have found that the company continues to
retaliate against employees for reporting work-related injuries and has

effectively created a chilling effect in the railroad industry,” the Labor
Department said in a news release.
Norfolk Southern spokesman Robin Chapman said the company
would appeal the decisions on all three workers before an
administrative law judge at the Labor Department.
Two of the three incidents occurred in 2010, according to the
agency’s release. An engineer in Louisville, Ky., and a conductor in
Harrisburg, Pa., were fired after reporting injuries from falls in or near
company bathrooms.
Norfolk Southern accused the employees of falsifying their injuries,
the agency said. The company also accused the conductor of failing to
promptly report the injury. “The day before the injury, the employee
had been lauded for excellent performance, highlighted by no lost
work time due to injuries in his 35-year career,” according to the
Labor Department release.
OSHA found that the company hearings for both workers were
“flawed.” In the case of the engineer, the hearing “was orchestrated to
intentionally support the decision to terminate the employee,” the
release said.
In the third incident, an employee in Greenville, S.C., was fired after
he reported being hit by a company truck. Norfolk Southern accused
him of “improper performance of duties.” The agency found he was
treated “disparately in comparison to four other employees involved
in the incident,” none of whom had reported injuries.
“Firing workers for reporting an injury is not only illegal, it also
endangers all workers,” David Michaels, an assistant U.S. secretary of
labor, said in a statement. “To prevent more injuries, railroad workers
must be able to report an injury without fear of retaliation.”
Reprinted with permission from The Virginian-Pilot.

The Extended Response Evaluation Guide appears on page 730

CHAPTER 7

Polishing Your Writing
Lesson 1: Strengthen Sentences
Key Ideas
Read your work as a whole to make sure that it is clear and logical.
Imagine that you are reading your work for the first time.
Correct any sentences that have errors in structure or punctuation.

Revising Unclear and Incorrect Sentences
When you write your response, your first step is to get your ideas down. To
do this, you follow a prewriting and drafting plan like the ones on pages146–
163. When you are finished drafting, go back and reread what you have
written. As you read each sentence, ask yourself:
Do the ideas in the sentence make sense? If not, how can I make the
sentence clearer? Add some words? Drop or move a confusing word or
phrase? Insert or delete punctuation? Change the words?

Is the sentence structure correct? If not, how can I correct it?
Read the paragraph below, and think about how you would revise the errorsin
clarity and sentence structure. Then compare it with the revised paragraph.
Paragraph with unclear and incorrect sentences:
Working outdoors has many advantages over working indoors.
When you are outside you are in contact with nature. You can enjoy
the sunshine on your face, hear the birds, and to smell the flowers.
You don’t have to consult the weather forecast on TV. In contrast,
sitting in a climate-controlled cubicle, it is not known whether the sky
is sunny or cloudy. Also, most outdoor jobs require you to use your
body, that can be a huge advantage. Finally, if you work indoors, you
might be sitting down at a desk, and typing all day long. After work,
instead of relaxing. You’ll probably have to go to the gym to work
out.

GED® TEST TIP
To prepare for the Extended Response, practice prewriting,
drafting, and revising often. Frequent practice will help you
feel more comfortable and confident as a writer.
Paragraph with revised sentence structure:
Working outdoors has many advantages over working indoors.
When you are outside, you are in contact with nature. You can enjoy
the sunshine on your face, hear the birds, and smell the flowers. You
don’t have to consult the weather forecast on TV. In contrast, when
you sit in a climate-controlled cubicle, you don’t know whether the
sky is sunny or cloudy. Also, most outdoor jobs require you to use
your body, and that can be a huge advantage. Finally, if you work
indoors, you might be sitting down at a desk and typing all day long.
After work, instead of relaxing, you’ll probably have to go to the gym

to work out.
Use these revision marks when you revise your sentences on paper:
To delete a word or punctuation mark, cross it out.
To add a word or punctuation mark, insert a caret (^) in the line where
you want it to go and then write it in above the line.
To change a word, cross it out and write the new word above it.
To move a word or phrase, circle it and draw an arrow to its new
position.
To capitalize a letter, draw three lines under it.

Practice 1
A. Directions: Read and revise the sentences. Correct these problems by
using revision marks.
fragments, run-ons, and comma splices
incorrect coordination and subordination
misplaced or dangling modifiers
problems in parallel structure

1. First, write down what you know about your family then interview
relatives.
2. Videotaping or to record the interviews is a good idea.
3. Ask relatives to provide exact names, dates, and give other details.
4. Making copies of documents such as birth certificates and marriage
licenses.
5. Interviewing older family members, they’ll often tell you stories you never

heard.
6. Record all the information you get and put it in a three-ring binder
carefully.
7. Some people use their computers to do genealogy searches, they get very
good results.
8. However, one must have the time, the patience, and know-how to use the
Internet.
9. If you decide to learn more about your roots don’t be surprised to find
yourself at a
huge family reunion.
10. The whole process of putting together a family tree and contacting longlost
family members.

B. Directions: Read the paragraphs below. Use revision marks to correct
problems with sentences.
It was a beautiful day, the blue ocean sparkled in the sunlight. A perfect
day for going to the beach.
Looking across the sand, two little girls were building a sandcastle and made
a moat next to it. Renelle
spread out her towel she anchored it with her shoes and beach bag and began
to read a magazine.
Suddenly she heard a voice. “Are you going to get in the water, or are you
just going to lie there?”
Renelle looked up, and saw her friend Terry. She laughed softly and she got
up and she greeted Terry.
Putting on her sandals, the two of them walked across the burning sand to the
water’s edge.
Renelle loved going to the beach. Going to the beach relaxed her. Going to

the beach helped her forget about her problems. It didn’t cost money like
most other forms of entertainment. Most of Renelle’s friends also spent a lot
of time at the beach so that was another incentive.
Answers and explanations start on page 656.

Lesson 2: Improve Organization
Key Ideas
Revise your response so that the organization is clear to the reader.
Make sure that paragraph breaks fall in the right places.
Check for faulty transitions and irrelevant details.

Revising Problems in Organization
When you reread your response, you may also need to make changes in
organization to make the response clearer to the reader. As you read, ask
yourself:
Is my main idea clear?
Are there a clear introduction, body of support, and conclusion?
Is the paragraphing correct? Does each paragraph relate to only one
main idea? Should any paragraphs be split into two? Should any be
combined?
Does each paragraph have a topic sentence that tells the main idea? Are
any of the other sentences in a place that doesn’t make sense? Are there
any irrelevant details that should be removed?
Does the writing flow smoothly from sentence to sentence and from
paragraph to paragraph? If not, where can I add transitions?
Read the sample paragraph below. Think about how you would correct the

errors in organization. Then compare it with the revised paragraph.

GED® TEST TIP
When you write a draft on paper, leave wide margins and
space between lines so that you can more easily use the
revision marks. On a computer, you can use the cut, copy, and
paste functions to revise.
Paragraph with problems in organization:
(1) Many people believe that changes in technology have improved
our communication with others. (2) I believe that the opposite is true.
(3) So-called technological improvements have led to a marked
decline in the quality of interpersonal communication. (4) In the old
days, when you called someone, the person was likely to pick up the
phone to find out who was calling. (5) Nowadays, screening devices
make that unnecessary. (6) By listening to your voice on the
answering machine or by seeing your phone number pop up on his
caller identification box, the other person can decide that he doesn’t
care to speak to you. (7) This encourages long games of “phone tag.”
(8) Television is another example—you can barely get a word out of
someone who is glued to the tube.
Paragraphs with revised organization:
(1) Many people believe that changes in technology have improved
our communication with others. (2) However, I believe that the
opposite is true. (3) So-called technological improvements have led to
a marked decline in the quality of interpersonal communication.
(*) Phone use is one area in which communication has suffered. (4)
In the old days, when you called someone, the person was likely to
pick up the phone to find out who was calling. (5) Nowadays,
screening devices make that unnecessary. (6) By listening to your
voice on the answering machine or by seeing your phone number pop

up on his caller identification box, the other person can decide that he
doesn’t care to speak to you. (7) This encourages long games of
“phone tag.”
In the revised paragraphs, the transition however was added to sentence 2.
The piece was divided into two paragraphs—an introductory paragraph and a
body paragraph about phone use. A topic sentence (marked with *) was
added. Sentence 8 of the original, which was not related to telephones, was
deleted.
Use these symbols to revise essay organization:
To change whole sentences, use the same marks you used to change
words.
To start a new paragraph, use the paragraph symbol (¶).

Practice 2
A. Directions: Using the revision marks, revise the paragraphs below. One
revision has been made for you.

This inconsiderate attitude is also reflected in the refusal to recycle plastic,
glass, and newspapers. People figure that they won’t be around in the future
when the landfills are used up, so who cares? Another possible reason for
littering is low self-esteem. If people don’t feel good about themselves, they
won’t be motivated to keep their environment looking attractive. Low selfesteem can cause many other problems, including depression and lack of self-

confi-dence. People who have high self-esteem believe that it’s important to
keep their home, the planet Earth, clean and beautiful.
B. Directions: Revise the response that you wrote to the Gettysburg Address
writing prompt on page 162.
Be sure to check for:
clear main idea
introduction, body, and conclusion
correct paragraphing
topic sentences
logical placement of sentences
irrelevant details that should be removed
clear transitions
Save your work. You will use it in the next step of the writing process,
editing.
Answers and explanations start on page 657.

Lesson 3: Word Choice
After you have written and revised your response, you will need to edit it. In
the editing stage of the writing process, you check for correct grammar,
usage, and word choice. You may already have made some organizational
changes. The kinds of changes you make when you are editing will be
smaller—more like fine-tuning.

Key Ideas
Use precise words instead of vague ones.
Express your ideas in as few words as possible.

When writing a response, use formal language instead of slang.

Word choice is an important aspect of writing. There are several aspects of
word choice to look at when you are editing: using precise words, avoiding
wordiness, and avoiding slang.
People often use vague terms when they are speaking. They say things like,
“It was a great party!” or “The weather is nice today.” General words like
great and nice are okay in conversation because the listener can ask questions
such as, “What was so great about the party?” In writing, however, you
should try to write specific words that create a clear picture for the reader.
With vague words: Tim took a long hike in the beautiful mountains.
With precise words: Tim took a 12-mile hike in the rocky, snowy
mountains.
With vague words: He walked through a forest where the ground was
covered with pine needles.
With precise words: He meandered through a forest where the ground was
carpeted with pine needles.

GED® TEST TIP
When you read your draft, focus on the specific words and ask
yourself, “Can I make this clearer or more concise?” If so,
revise accordingly to improve your score on the response.
It’s also helpful to your reader if you write concisely and avoid wordiness.
Being brief helps the reader focus on your message. If you notice that you
have said the same thing twice, cut out the extra words.
Too wordy: Tim’s dream and the thing he hopes for most of all is to make a

home for himself and live in a cabin in the woods.
More concise: Tim’s most cherished dream is to live in a cabin in the woods.
Too wordy: The only thing getting in the way of his having this dream come
true is that his wife isn’t so sure that it’s such a fantastic idea.
More concise: The only obstacle to realizing his dream is his wife’s
resistance.
Finally, avoid using slang when writing your essay. Though people
sometimes use informal language when speaking, essay writing calls for
more formal language. Take care to express yourself appropriately.
With slang: Tim is going to hit the road at seven tonight.
With more formal language: Tim is going to leave town at seven tonight.
With slang: He needs a better map because he’s totally clueless about
directions.
With more formal language: He needs a better map because he has
difficulty understanding directions.

Practice 3
A. Directions: Replace each of the underlined words or phrases with
more appropriate language. Write your answers on a separate sheet
of paper.
1. Families International is a nonprofit organization that does not make any
money.
2. We give aid to many children in the Third World every year.
3. These children must endure lousy living conditions.

4. Your donation, even if it is only five bucks, will help a child get food and
clothing.
5. Please send your donation as soon and as quickly as possible to the
following address.
B. Directions: Edit the paragraphs below for correct grammar and
usage, paying special attention to nouns and pronouns, subject-verb
agreement, and regular and irregular verbs.
If you ever order merchandise from a catalog, you should be aware of your
rights. All companies, regardless of what state they are located in, is required
to ship your order within 30 days unless they have advertise a different
shipping time. If a company is unable to meet the shipping deadline, they
must send you an “Option Notice.” You can choose to wait longer or get a
refund.
Some consumers complaining about receiving merchandise that they did
not order. They were told that companies that engaged in this practice broken
the law. If they send you a product you haven’t order, it is yours to keep.
If you receive a package that been damaged, don’t open it. Write
“REFUSED” on the package, and return it to the seller. There’s no need to
add new postage as long as the package come by regular mail.
C. Directions: Revise the response you wrote to the Gettysburg Address
writing prompt on page 162.
Be sure to check for:
Correct use of nouns and pronouns
Correct use of regular and irregular verbs
Subject-verb agreement
Word choice
Answers and explanations start on page 657.

Polishing Your Writing Practice Questions

Questions 1 through 5 refer to the following paragraphs.
Gardening for Success
(A)
(1) Flowers, herbs, and shrubs can beautify both small and large spaces in
your home or yard. (2) In addition, growing your own vegetables can be
enjoyable and healthful. (3) If you want to be a successful
you
follow some simple guidelines.
(B)
(4) First, determine whether you’ll be gardening indoors or outdoors. (5)
This might depend on what type of home you live in, or it might depend on
the climate. (6) If you live in an apartment building and don’t have access to
a community garden, an indoor garden might be right for you. (7) An indoor
garden is also an
for the plants that you’d like to grow.
(C)
(8) Indoors, you’ll need to place your plants near a window where they’ll
get some sunlight each day. (9) Choose your growing space carefully,
whether indoors or outdoors. (10) Outdoors, find a spot that doesn’t have a
lot of rocks or clay. (11) Likewise, you should choose your plants carefully.
(D)
(12) Investigate various
find out how much sunlight and water
they need and what temperature they prefer. (13) You might be surprised to
find, for instance, that you shouldn’t try to grow basil in a shady side yard or
impatiens in full sun. (14) A little extra effort up front will help you avoid
common gardening pitfalls and enjoy your garden more.
1. If you want to be a successful
guidelines.
A. gardener, importantly

you follow some simple

B. gardener, but it’s important that
C. gardener, it’s important that
D. gardener. And it’s important that
2. An indoor garden is also an
grow.

for the plants that you’d like to

A. option if you live in a climate that is too extreme
B. option if one lives in a climate that is not good
C. option, if you live in a climate that is not good
D. option if you live in a climate that is not good
3. Which revision would improve the effectiveness of paragraph C?
A. move sentence 11 to the beginning of paragraph C
B. move sentence 8 to follow sentence 9
C. move sentence 8 to follow sentence 10
D. move sentence 8 to follow sentence 11
4. Which revision would improve the effectiveness of the article?
A. move sentence 12 to the end of paragraph C
B. move sentence 3 to the beginning of paragraph B
C. move sentence 7 to the beginning of paragraph C
D. move sentence 11 to the beginning of paragraph D
5. Investigate various
find out how much sunlight and water
they need and what temperature they prefer.
A. plants, but
B. plants or
C. plants to
D. plants, and then
Questions 6 through 10 refer to the following paragraphs.

Rowing Across the Atlantic
(1) When I was a child, my grandmother often told me stories about her
father. (2) He was born in
the United States when he was 2 years
old. (3) His trip to this country was a mystery to me.
(4) “Dad always said he came over in a rowboat,” Granny explained. (5) I
tried to imagine a 2-year-old boy rowing across the
seemed
impossible that he could have done that. (6)
Atlantic Ocean in a
rowboat?
(7) I had many questions for Granny. (8) “Were his parents with him?” I
asked. (9) “No, I think he came by himself,” she explained, laughing. (10)
Was she
? (11) The stories always ended with Granny wiping
tears from her eyes. (12) She had several grandchildren. (13) “Oh, how I wish
you had known him,” she cried.
6. He was born in

the United States when he was 2 years old.

A. Wales and had come to
B. Wales which coming to
C. Wales which had come to
D. Wales, which had come to
7. I tried to imagine a 2-year-old boy rowing across the
impossible that he could have done that.
A. ocean however it
B. ocean, thus it
C. ocean. Thus it
D. ocean; it
8.

Atlantic Ocean in a rowboat?
A. Could he had crossed to
B. He could have crossed the really big

seemed

C. Could he have crossed the vast
D. Could he crossed the really big
9. Was she

?

A. totally pulling my leg
B. joking
C. totally kidding
D. for real
10. Which sentence should be removed from the last paragraph?
A. sentence 10
B. sentence 11
C. sentence 12
D. sentence 13
Questions 11 through 14 refer to the following paragraphs.
Southern Gothic Writer
(A)
Flannery O’Connor was a gifted Southern writer. She wrote many short
stories and two novels. She is known for writing in a Southern gothic style
and exploring topics of religion, ethics,
explored the dark side of
human nature.
(B)
One of O’Connor’s most popular stories, “A Good Man is Hard to Find”
was written in 1953 and focuses on a man called The Misfit.
her
most shocking story. It raises important questions of good and evil, morality
and immorality, and Southern historical issues.
(C)

When Flannery was just 26, she was diagnosed with lupus. The disease
that had killed her father. To manage her health, she returned to her family’s
farm, Andalusia, in Milledgeville, Georgia. There, she lived with her mother
Regina and wrote many of her most important works. She delighted in raising
birds of all varieties, including peafowl.
(D)
During her time at Andalusia,
. Although she was only
expected to live for five years after her lupus diagnosis, she managed to
survive for fourteen.
11. She is known for writing in a Southern gothic style and exploring topics
of religion, ethics,
explored the dark side of human nature.
A. and morality she also frequently
B. and morality she also, frequently
C. and morality frequently
D. and morality. She also frequently
12.

her most shocking story.
A. Many figure this is
B. Many consider this
C. Many think it ought to be a
D. Many reckon this ought to be her

13. When Flannery was just 26, she was diagnosed with lupus. The disease
that had killed her father.
Which is the best way to revise these two sentences?
A. Switch the order of the two sentences.
B. Insert the second sentence after the comma in the first sentence.
C. Combine the two sentences by replacing the period with a comma.
D. Remove the second sentence.

14. During her time at Andalusia,

.

A. Flannery maintained many fulfilling correspondences that gave her the
insight into human behavior that is evident in her writing
B. Flannery also maintained many correspondences with friends, family,
and other writers, which is why she had a special insight into human
behavior that is displayed in her writing
C. Flannery also maintained many fulfilling correspondences with friends,
family, and other writers which is why she is
believed to have had a special insight into human behavior that is in
her writing
D. Flannery maintained many correspondences with friends, family, and
other writers which is why she is believed to have had a special insight
into human behavior
Questions 15 through 19 refer to the following paragraphs.
Notification of Utility Repairs
Universal Utilities will soon begin repairs of the underground lines in your
neighborhood. This
to receive the exceptional service you have
come to expect from us.
We will begin by installing a new pipeline under your street.
the smaller line that runs from the street to your home. Lastly we will install a
new meter at your home.
This work will require our company’s trucks to be in your neighborhood.
We apologize for any inconvenience this may cause during peak travel
may experience a temporary disruption in your utility service.

If you have any questions
. We can be reached by telephone,
or you may visit our website. Thank you for allowing us to serve your utility
needs.
15. This

to receive the exceptional service you have come to

expect from us.
A. will ensure you continue
B. will ensure you always continue
C. is ensuring you always continue
D. will ensure they always continue
16.

the smaller line that runs from the street to your home.
A. Than next we will replace
B. Then we will replace
C. Then next we will replace
D. Then next we will have replaced

17. We apologize for any inconvenience this may cause during peak travel
may experience a temporary disruption in your utility
service.
A. times, you
B. times but you
C. times. You
D. times, and so you
18.
A. However we will adjust your bill accordingly if your service is
interrupts.
B. However we will adjust your bill accordingly if your service is
interrupted.
C. However we will adjust your bill accordingly thus your service is
interrupted.
D. However, we will adjust your bill accordingly if your service is
interrupted.
19. If you have any questions

.

A. about the scheduled repairs. Please contact our office

B. about the scheduled repairs, please contact our office
C. about the scheduled repairs please contact our office
D. , about the scheduled repairs. Please contact our office
Answers and explanations begin on page 657.

CHAPTER 8

Using Grammar Correctly
Lesson 1: Noun and Pronoun Agreement
Using Nouns and Pronouns
A noun names a person (such as woman or Anne), a place (such as drugstore
or Florida), a thing (such as car or Titanic), or an idea (truth or Buddhism). A
proper noun refers to a specific person, place, thing, or idea; a common
noun is more general. For example, Anne is a proper noun; woman is a
common noun.

Key Ideas
A noun names a person, place, thing, or idea.
A pronoun takes the place of a noun.
Use subject, object, and possessive pronouns in the proper places.

A pronoun is a word that replaces a noun. The antecedent is the noun that is
being replaced, as shown below:

There are three types of pronouns: subject, object, and possessive.
EXAMPLES
A subject pronoun replaces the subject of a sentence.

Use this chart for help in remembering the three types of pronouns:
Subject Pronoun:
replaces subject

Object Pronoun:
replaces object

Possessive Pronoun:
shows ownership

I

me

my, mine

you

you

your, yours

he

him

his

she

her

her, hers

it

it

its

we

us

ours

they

them

their, theirs

GED® TEST TIP

To choose the option with the correct pronoun in a compound
like “They went to the party with James and I,” take out
“James and” and ask yourself whether the sentence still sounds
correct.
Avoid these mistakes with pronouns in compound subjects and objects:
Incorrect pronoun in compound subject: Linda and me went to the
movies.
Correct: Linda and I went to the movies.
Incorrect pronoun in compound object: We saw Kareem and he at the
theater.
Correct: We saw Kareem and him at the theater.

Practice 1.1
A. Directions: Write the correct pronoun to replace each underlined
noun.
1. Laurie and Paul just moved to California.
_______________________________
2. A neighbor told Laurie and Paul that saving water was important there.
________________
3. He said they should turn the water off when brushing their teeth.
______________
4. Laurie’s sister suggested getting a special shower head that saves water.
______________
5. Laurie and Laurie’s sister will go shopping for it on Sunday.
_______________

B. Questions 6 through 8 refer to the following letter.
To Whom It May Concern:
I am writing to recommend Bonetta Williams for the position of
managerial assistant in your firm. I believe that she is highly qualfied for the
position, and I urge you to strongly consider her candidacy.
have worked together for three years. As my secretary, she
has proven to be responsible and efficient.
her work done on
time and looks for ways to help others. In addition, I find her extremely
intelligent and likable. I will be sorry to see her go.
My supervisor, Walter Constantine, has also worked with Bonetta and
would be happy to speak with you if necessary. Please contact
you need any further information.
Sincerely,
Carol Rhodes
6.

have worked together for three years.
A. Bonetta and me
B. We (Bonetta and me)
C. Bonetta and me,
D. Bonetta and I

7.

her work done on time and looks for ways to help others.
A. She always getting
B. Her always getting
C. Her always gets
D. She always gets

8. Please contact

if you need any further information.

if

A. Walter and I
B. Walter or me
C. him or I
D. he or me
Answers and explanations start on page 658.

Pronoun-Antecedent Agreement
Pronouns should agree with their antecedents, or the nouns they refer to. For
example, a pronoun and its antecedent must agree in number. If the
antecedent is singular, the pronoun should be singular. If the antecedent is
plural, the pronoun should be plural.

Key Ideas
A pronoun should match its antecedent in person and number.
Make sure it is clear which antecedent a pronoun refers to.
If necessary, use a noun in place of a pronoun, or construct the
sentence differently so that the antecedent is clear.

EXAMPLES

Incorrect: Any employee who is interested should submit their application.
Correct: Any employee who is interested should submit his or her
application.
Correct: Employees who are interested should submit their applications.

Note that for collective nouns (such as company, jury, family, team,
committee, union), you generally use the singular pronoun it.
Incorrect: The committee announced that they will hold weekly meetings.
Correct: The committee announced that it will hold weekly meetings.

GED® TEST TIP
Take into account the whole passage when you are determining
which pronoun is correct. A common error to watch for is when
a paragraph begins with the third-person form one and then
shifts to the second-person form you.
A pronoun and its antecedent must agree in person. To agree, they both must
be first person (referring to the speaker), second person (the person spoken
to), or third person (the person or thing spoken about).
First person

Second person

Third person

I, me, my mine

you, your, yours he, him, his

we, us, our, ours

she, her, hers
it, its
they, them, their, theirs

The indefinite pronoun one is like a third-person personal pronoun. A common error in writing (and one that is tested on the Reasoning through
Language arts Test) is an incorrect shift between the third-person one and the
second-person you.
Incorrect shift: If one attends college classes, you can be reimbursed.
Correct: If one attends college classes, one can be reimbursed.

Correct: If one attends college classes, he or she can be reimbursed.
Correct: If you attend college classes, you can be reimbursed.
It must be clear which antecedent a pronoun refers to. If necessary, use a
noun in place of the pronoun, or reconstruct the sentence.
Unclear: Carlos spoke to his boss, and he told him about the program.
Clear (noun replaces pronoun): Carlos spoke to his boss, and his boss told
him about the program.
Clear (different construction): Carlos spoke to his boss, who told him about
the program.
Unclear: Michelle helped Shania fill out the financial aid application that she
had picked up.
Correct (different construction): After picking up a financial aid
application for Shania, Michelle helped her fill it out.

Practice 1.2
A. Directions: Correct any errors in pronoun use. If there are no errors,
write C. You may also have to change some verbs.

___ 1. Sally is moving to a small town. Her mother is concerned about the
health care options they offer.
___ 2. Sally tried to reassure her mother, but it was hard for her to believe her.
___ 3. Sally asked a friend who lives in the town for information about it’s
health care facilities.
___ 4. The town has a freestanding clinic where people can go when them are
sick.

___ 5. There is also a nearby hospital, and they have a very good reputation.
___ 6. If one is concerned about health care, you should sign up for a good
insurance plan.
B. Questions 7 through 9 refer to the following paragraphs.
The Best Discipline
What should parents do when their children act up? Parents often like the
idea of punishment, but punishment may not be the most effective solution. If
the punishment results from the parent’s anger, it won’t work. Instead,
children
parents angry.
One parenting expert feels that
should be clear about their
expectations from the outset so that children will not unknowingly violate
rules. They should respond to children’s misbehavior in a calm and neutral
fashion. It’s also important to choose a consequence related to the action. If a
child hits or bites in a play group, for example, it would be most appropriate
not to allow
for a short time. He or she will begin to see the
connection.
7. Instead, children

parents angry.

A. will learn only that they shouldn’t make one’s
B. will have learned only that they shouldn’t make one’s
C. will learn only that you shouldn’t make one’s
D. will learn only that they shouldn’t make their
8. One parenting expert feels that
should be clear about their
expectations from the outset so that children will not unknowingly violate
rules.
A. he
B. we
C. one
D. parents

9. If a child hits or bites in a play group, for example, it would be most
appropriate not to allow
for a short time.
A. the child to play with them
B. them to play with them
C. the child to play with the group
D. the child to plays with them
Answers and explanations start on page 658.

Lesson 2: Verb Forms and Tenses
Key Ideas
Each verb has four forms: present, present participle, past, and past
participle.
Verb forms are used to create different tenses, which show time
relationships.
Use clues in the sentence and paragraph to help decide which tense to
use.

Regular Verbs
An important part of writing correctly is using the right verb forms. A verb is
a word that indicates action or being. Each verb has four forms. A regular
verb follows a consistent pattern to create each verb form.
Base form: look
Tense

Verb Form How to Write It

Present

look/looks

with I, you, we, they: use the base form

with he, she, it: add -s to the base form
Present participle looking

add -ing

Past

looked

add -ed (-d if verb ends with e)

Past participle

looked

add -ed (-d if verb ends with e)

The forms are used to create different verb tenses, or times. The table below
shows how verb tense and form are related. Notice that when you use certain
tenses, you must also use a helping verb—often a form of be or have.

Tense

Verb
Form

Use

Present

look/looks a habitual action, general truth, or state of
being: I look at the newspaper every day.

Past

looked

an action that has been completed: I looked at it
this morning.

Future

will look

an action that has not yet happened: I will look
at it tonight, too.

Present
am/is/are
progressive looking

an action in progress: I am looking at it right
now.

Present
perfect

have/has
looked

an action that began in the past and continues
until now: I have looked at it every day this
week.

Past
perfect

had
looked

an action that was completed before a specific
time in the past: I had looked at it before it got
wet.

Future
perfect

will have
looked

an action that will be completed by a specific
time in the future: I will have looked at it by the
time I get home.

GED® TEST TIP

Some passages on the GED® Test have a verb-tense question
based on the tense of the entire passage. Make sure you select
verb forms that are consistent with the tense of the passage.
Sentences often contain clues that tell you which tense to use. For instance,
time words and phrases like yesterday or last week show that the past should
be used, tonight and next month indicate the future, and by tonight, since
2000, and for seven years indicate the perfect tenses.
Other verbs in the sentence can be clues: I look at the newspaper whenever I
get the chance. Finally, verbs in other sentences also can be clues. The verbs
in a paragraph or passage are generally in the same tense.

Practice 2.1
A. Directions: Rewrite each verb in its correct tense. Use clues in each
sentence for help in choosing the tense.
EXAMPLE: Between 1892 and 1924, about 12 million immigrants entered
(enter) the U.S. through Ellis Island in New York.
1. By the 1950s, Ellis Island ___________ (cease) to be an important
immigration checkpoint.
2. The government ____________ (close) Ellis Island to immigration in
1954.
3. Now Ellis Island _______________ (function) as a national monument.
4. Since the island was reopened as a museum in 1990, many tourists
_______________ (visit) it.
5. Soon, a genealogical center _____________ (open).
6. The island ____________ (look) different than it did originally because 24
acres of landfill have been added.

7. Now we ______________ (think) about taking a trip to Ellis Island next
month.
B. Questions 8 through 10 refer to the following advertisement.
Don’t Miss Your Chance!
The Express Lane credit card
a fantastic deal right now, for a
limited time only.
, you will receive a 20 percent discount on
your first five purchases!
The Express Lane card carries no monthly charge. You’ll pay a low $35
fee just once a year. Become an Express Lane member now. Your savings
opportunities
!
8. The Express Lane credit card
limited time only.

a fantastic deal right now, for a

A. offered
B. is offering
C. offers
D. will offer
, you will receive a 20 percent discount on your first five

9.
purchases!

A. If you are signing up for Express Lane before April 9
B. If you have signed up for Express Lane before April 9
C. If you will sign up for Express Lane before April 9
D. If you sign up for Express Lane before April 9
10. Your savings opportunities
A. will have been amazing you
B. would be amazing you
C. will be amazing you

!

D. will amaze you
Answers and explanations start on page 658.

Irregular Verbs
Key Ideas
Irregular verb forms do not follow a single pattern.
Some irregular verbs follow an i, a, u pattern.

Most verbs are regular verbs; their past and participle forms follow the same
pattern. Some verbs, however, are irregular verbs. Although some irregular
verbs follow a pattern, most do not.
A common error with irregular verbs is using the past participle in place of
the past—for instance, I been there instead of I was there. Discover which
irregular verb forms, if any, give you problems. Then learn the correct forms.
Here are some tips for learning the forms of irregular verbs:
If you find two verbs that rhyme in the present form (for example, grow
and throw), check to see if they have the same forms in the past and past
participles (grew, grown; threw, thrown). If so, learn them together.
Learn which verbs follow the i, a, u pattern: sing, sang, sung; drink,
drank, drunk; sink, sank, sunk. However, be aware that there are
exceptions (bring, brought, brought).

GED® TEST TIP
When you choose an answer that changes a verb, read the
sentence again with your choice in it. Doing so may help you
“hear” whether the verb form is correct.

Here is a list of common irregular verbs.
Present Form Past Form Past Participle Form
am, are, is

was, were

been

become

became

become

begin

began

begun

blow

blew

blown

break

broke

broken

bring

brought

brought

buy

bought

bought

choose

chose

chosen

come

came

come

do

did

done

drink

drank

drunk

eat

ate

eaten

fall

fell

fallen

fly

flew

flown

freeze

froze

frozen

get

got

gotten

give

gave

given

go

went

gone

grow

grew

grown

have, has

had

had

know

knew

known

leave

left

left

lose

lost

lost

ride

rode

ridden

run

ran

run

see

saw

seen

shake

shook

shaken

show

showed

shown

speak

spoke

spoken

steal

stole

stolen

take

took

taken

throw

threw

thrown

wear

wore

worn

write

wrote

written

Practice 2.2
A. Directions: Write the correct form of the verb shown in parentheses.
EXAMPLE: Since November, the school’s heating system has broken
(break) down several times.
1. Yesterday the technician ___________ (come) to resolve the problem once
and for all.
2. School employees ___________ (show) him the boiler.
3. The technician said, “If you __________ (speak) to me about this sooner,
it would have been easier to fix.”
4. He _____________ (take) parts out of the heating system and replaced
them with new ones.
5. He said, “I’ve never ______________ (see) such a poorly installed
system.”
B. Questions 6 through 8 refer to the following paragraphs.

TV Ratings System
In 1996, television industry representatives announced that the industry
had formed TV Parental Guidelines. This rating system, designed to give
parents advance warning about the content of TV shows,
TV in
1997. The ratings system
down into six different categories,
ranging from “All Children” to “Mature Audiences Only.”
Six months later, after pressure from advocacy groups, the television
industry agreed to include additional labels to advise viewers if a show they
were about to view contained violence, sexual activity, coarse language, or
sexually suggestive language. These labels
more specific and
therefore more helpful information about an upcoming show.
6. This rating system, designed to give parents advance warning about the
content of TV shows,
TV in 1997.
A. begun to appear on
B. began to appearing on
C. had begun to appear on
D. began to appear on
7. The ratings system
down into six different categories, ranging
from “All Children” to “Mature Audiences Only.”
A. broke itself
B. broke
C. was broken
D. had broken
8. These labels
more specific and therefore more helpful
information about an upcoming show.
A. now given viewers
B. now give viewers
C. now will give viewers

D. now have given viewers
Answers and explanations start on page 658.

Lesson 3: Subject-Verb Agreement
Agreement with a Simple Subject
Key Ideas
A verb must match its subject in number.
Collective nouns are singular when they refer to a group as a single
unit.
Indefinite pronouns may be singular, plural, or both.

In the present tense, subjects and verbs must agree in number. To understand
the basics of subject-verb agreement, study the chart below. Notice that
present tense verbs take an -s ending when they are used with the pronoun
subjects he, she, and it or their noun equivalents.
Verb Forms for Singular Subjects Verb Forms for Plural Subjects
I jump

we jump

you jump

you jump

he, she, it jumps

they jump

To master subject-verb agreement for the GED® Test, be aware of these
special nouns and pronouns:
Collective nouns are usually singular, even though they may seem plural.
A collective noun names a group, such as army, crew, crowd, staff, family,
herd, or flock. If the group is considered to be a single unit, it is singular.

EXAMPLES
The army is a good place to learn discipline.
The church choir sings each Sunday.
Some nouns that end in -s may look plural, but in fact they are not.

GED® TEST TIP
To check for correct subject-verb agreement, ask yourself:
"Does the verb agree with its subject? Is the verb in the right
form? Is the verb in the right tense for both the sentence and
the passage?"
EXAMPLE
Politics is an interesting topic.
Indefinite pronouns do not refer to a specific person. Some indefinite
pronouns are singular, some are plural, and some may be either.
Singular anyone, everyone, someone, no one, one, anybody, everybody,
somebody, nobody, anything, everything, something, nothing,
another, other, either, neither, each, much
Plural

many, several, few, both

Singular all, none, some, any, part, most
or
plural
EXAMPLES
Singular: These days, it seems as if almost everyone is joining a health club.
Singular: Most of the equipment is easy to use.
Plural: Most of the exercise classes are fun
Plural: A few are advanced classes for those already in great shape.

Practice 3.1
A. Directions: Underline the correct verb form to complete each
sentence.
EXAMPLE: Every Monday, the National Orchestra (perform, performs) live
on the radio.
1. The public (is, are) invited to listen free of charge.
2. Free tickets (becomes, become) available one hour before the
performance.
3. The performance (is, are) usually held in Barnes Hall.
4. Many well-known musicians (has, have) played there.
5. Everyone (seem, seems) to enjoy these concerts very much.
6. The concert series (is, are) very popular.
B. Questions 7 through 9 refer to the following article.
The Speed of Sound
Most of us
airplane noise that is so loud it sounds like an
explosion.
fly faster than the speed of sound. Listeners on the
ground hear the noise, but it is not audible to passengers.
The speed of sound is 1,088 feet per second at 32°F at sea level. It is
different at other temperatures and in other substances. For example, sound
travels faster in water than in air. Sound takes about one second to move a
mile under water, but five seconds to move a mile through air. It travels
through ice cold vapor at 4,708 feet per second and through ice cold water at
4,938 feet per second. Surprisingly,
very well. For instance,
sound travels through glass at speeds up to 19,690 feet per second.
7. Most of us

airplane noise that is so loud it sounds like an

explosion.
A. were hearing
B. have heard
C. having heard
D. hears
fly faster than the speed of sound.

8.

A. That noise occurs when a plane start to
B. That noise occurred when a plane start to
C. That noise occurs when a plane starts to
D. That noise occur when a plane start to
9. Surprisingly,

very well.

A. some other materials conducts sound
B. some other materials conduct sound
C. some other materials conducted sound
D. any other material conducts sound
Answers and explanations start on page 658.

Agreement with a Compound Subject
A compound subject is made up of two or more subjects joined by and or or.
To make a verb agree with a compound subject, follow these guidelines:

Key Ideas
If a compound subject is joined by and, use a plural verb.
If a compound subject is joined by or, either . . . or, or neither . . .
nor, the verb should agree with the subject closer to it.
When checking subject-verb agreement, ignore interrupting phrases
and watch for inverted structure.

When two or more subjects are joined by and, the compound subject is
plural. Use the correct verb form for the plural.
EXAMPLE: Tricia and her sister are caring for their mother.
If two subjects are joined by or, the verb agrees with the subject closer to it:
EXAMPLE: A health aide or a nurse visits each day.
When subjects are joined by either . . . or or neither . . . nor, the verb agrees
with the subject closer to it.
EXAMPLE: Neither the sisters nor their brother has medical training.

Interrupting Words
Sometimes a word or group of words comes between the subject and the
verb. In that case, locate the subject by asking yourself, “What is this
sentence really about?” Mentally cross out the interruptor. Then make the
verb agree with the subject.

Interrupting phrases often begin with prepositions, such as of, in, on, from,
with, to, and for.
EXAMPLE: A pile of medical supplies rests in the front hallway.
Interrupting phrases may be set off by commas. Watch especially for phrases
beginning with words like along with, as well as, besides, and in addition to.

GED® TEST TIP

Read there’s as there is and here’s as here is.
EXAMPLES
Dr. Silva, who is one of the surgeons, consults with the family.
The sisters, along with the medical team, keep the patient comfortable.

Inverted Structure
Checking subject-verb agreement can be tricky when the sentence structure is
inverted—that is, when the subject comes after the verb. Most questions and
sentences that begin with here or there are inverted.
EXAMPLES
Does the pharmacy have enough medicine to fill the prescription?
Here are the hospital supplies that Tricia ordered.
Incorrect: What is Tricia and her family going to do?
Correct: What are Tricia and her family going to do?
Incorrect: Do Tricia want to send her mother to a hospital?
Correct: Does Tricia want to send her mother to a hospital?
Incorrect: There’s the bandages. (Remember that There’s is short for There
is.)
Correct: There are the bandages.

Practice 3.2
A. Directions: If a sentence contains an interrupting phrase, cross out
the interruptor. Then underline the correct verb to complete the

sentence.
EXAMPLE: Brushing and flossing with regularity (is, are) key to good
dental health.
1. Many toothpastes on the market (carry, carries) a seal of approval from the
American
Dental Association.
2. Products carrying the seal (are, is) tested to guarantee that they are safe
and effective.
3. Fluoride, an important ingredient in many toothpastes, (strengthens,
strengthen) teeth and (attacks, attack) bacteria that cause tooth decay.
4. There (is, are) toothpastes that claim to have special benefits, like tartar
control or whitening.
5. Some pharmacies and supermarkets (offers, offer) store-brand toothpaste
at a low price.
6. Any toothpaste with fluoride and good flavor (is, are) fine to use, even if
it’s not a brand-name toothpaste.
B. Questions 7 through 9 refer to the following paragraphs.
Unemployment Insurance
Unemployment insurance provides workers who have lost their jobs with
partial replacement of their salaries. Each state
its own laws.
the amount received. When the unemployment rate rises above a
certain level, states are required to extend the benefits. The state and federal
governments share the cost of the additional benefits.
In most states, employer contributions pay for this program. Unemployed
workers who wish to
public employment office to learn about
job openings.

7. Each state

its own laws.

A. administers its own program and have
B. administer its own program and have
C. administers its own program and has
D. administers it’s own program and have
8.

the amount received.
A. Wage level and the length of employment determine
B. Wage level and the length of employment determines
C. Wage level and the length of employment would be determined by
D. Wage level and the length of employment will then determine

9. Unemployed workers who wish to
to learn about job openings.

public employment office

A. draw benefits reports regularly to their
B. draw benefits, reports regularly to their
C. draw benefits report regularly to their
D. draw benefits reports regularly to there
Answers and explanations start on page 658.

Using Grammar Correctly Practice
Questions
Questions 1 through 5 refer to the following paragraphs.
Unorthodox Tennis Stars
Venus and Serena Williams are not your typical tennis stars. For one thing,
they are African Americans in a game that few African Americans have
become famous for playing; those who preceded them were Althea Gibson,

Arthur Ashe, and Zina Garrison. For another, Venus and Serena are sisters.
Tennis players often receive hours of instruction from
that
way for Venus and Serena. Instead, their father, the former owner of a
security-services business, taught them how to play on public courts, after
teaching himself through books and films. The family lived in a rough
neighborhood, and gang members watched over the girls while
practiced.
The practice paid off. Venus had won 63 tournaments by the time she
turned 12, and she became a professional at 14. In just a few years, she
millions of dollars in endorsements and prizes. Serena, turning
professional a year after Venus, had a slower start. However, some experts
think she may now be better than her sister.
The two sisters,
the court,

. Though they sometimes face each other on
.

1. Tennis players often receive hours of instruction from
way for Venus and Serena.

that

A. highly paid coaches, but it doesn’t happen
B. highly paid coaches but it doesn’t happen
C. highly paid coaches, but it didn’t happen
D. highly paid coach, but it doesn’t happen
2. The family lived in a rough neighborhood, and gang members watched
over the girls while
practiced.
A. they
B. the girls
C. each
D. them
3. In just a few years, she
and prizes.

millions of dollars in endorsements

A. is earning
B. earned
C. earn
D. will earn
4. The two sisters,

.

A. who live in Palm Beach Gardens, Florida, is best friends
B. who lives in Palm Beach Gardens, Florida, is best friends
C. who live in Palm Beach Gardens, Florida is best friends
D. who live in Palm Beach Gardens, Florida, are best friends
5. Though they sometimes face each other on the court,

.

A. there been no trace of sibling rivalry
B. there had not been a trace of sibling rivalry
C. there will be no trace of sibling rivalry
D. there is no trace of sibling rivalry
Questions 6 through 10 refer to the following paragraphs.
Getting the Best Service for Your Car
Have you had trouble finding a good mechanic? By following these tips,
you can improve your chances of getting quality service.
Even before your car breaks down, look for a shop you like and trust. Ask
good service at a reasonable price. Don’t
to home,
for another shop may have a better deal. Be wary of ads that offer rockbottom prices. Specials like
.
Be as specific as possible when you describe your car’s problem to the
mechanic. If the technician must spend time trying to determine
cost more. You also need to request information about both estimates and
guarantees before the repair work starts. Ask for a price range rather than an
exact estimate. Find out how long the guarantee lasts and whether

any time or mileage limits.
If you don’t understand a repair explanation, ask for clarification right
away. In addition, keep records of all repairs and billing in case of a dispute.
6. Ask

good service at a reasonable price.

A. people where they will receive
B. people where they have received
C. people where they receiving
D. them where they will receive
7. Don’t

to home, for another shop may have a better deal.

A. have picked a shop just because it’s close
B. be picking a shop just because it’s close
C. have picked a shop just because its close
D. pick a shop just because it’s close
8. Specials like

.

A. these often comes with restrictions attached
B. this often comes with restrictions attached
C. these often came with restrictions attached
D. these often come with restrictions attached
9. If the technician must spend time trying to determine
more.

cost

A. what’s wrong, it will
B. what are wrong, it will
C. what’s wrong it will
D. what’s wrong, the repair job will
10. Find out how long the guarantee lasts and whether
or mileage limits.

any time

A. there is
B. there be
C. there are
D. there were
Questions 11 through 15 refer to the following letter.
Taxpayer Notification
We have received your tax return and have noted some inconsistencies in
it. We are therefore proposing a number of changes to your return. These
on your refund are outlined below.
First, the amount you claimed for self-employed income differs from our
records. If you wish to contest this change, please
. Second, you
have made an error in your calculations. Please review
.
Because of these changes to your return, the amount of taxes you owe
. Your refund has therefore been reduced accordingly.
Contact us if you have any questions about these specific problems or
about the documents you must send to contest the changes. Be sure to send
the last page of this letter when replying by mail. If we determine that your
return was correct as filed, we
your account.
11. These

on your refund are outlined below.

A. changes and its effect
B. changes and their effect
C. changes, and its effect
D. changes and it’s effect
12. If you wish to contest this change, please
A. send photocopies of one’s records
B. to send photocopies of one’s records

.

C. send photocopies of your records
D. send photocopies of their records
13. Please review

.

A. our calculations, which is appended to this letter
B. are calculations, which is appended (to this letter)
C. our calculations which is appended to this letter
D. our calculations, which are appended to this letter
14. Because of these changes to your return, the amount of taxes you owe
.
A. has increased
B. have increased
C. is increasing
D. are increasing
15. If we determine that your return was correct as filed, we
your account.
A. are crediting
B. will credit
C. will have credited
D. had credited
Questions 16 through 20 refer to the following paragraphs.
Disability Etiquette
Many of us
know how to act when meeting someone who has
a disability. The main thing to remember
just like everyone else.
They want to be treated with respect and dignity. Beyond that, try the
following tips.
When you meet a person with a disability, speak and act with

as you would with anyone else. Use your usual tone of voice. A person who
has trouble hearing you will let you know. Don’t talk down to the person or
stare. Refrain from using a term like handicap, which focuses on the
disability rather than on the person. Instead, use a term such as physically
disabled or say, “He uses a wheelchair.”
Any assistive equipment,
. Unless you have the person’s
express permission, you should not touch it. Also, don’t pet a blind person’s
guide dog because distracting
could put the owner in danger.
Finally, if you have a child with you, don’t prevent him or her from talking
to the person or asking questions. Children are often more accepting than
adults.
16. Many of us
has a disability.

know how to act when meeting someone who

A. does not
B. don’t
C. didn’t
D. never does
17. The main thing to remember

just like everyone else.

A. is that people with disabilities has feelings
B. are that people with disabilities has feelings
C. is that people with disabilities have feelings
D. is that those with disabilities has feelings
18. When you meet a person with a disability, speak and act with
as you would with anyone else.
A. he or her
B. him or her
C. him or she
D. them

19. Any assistive equipment,

.

A. such as a wheelchair, cane or communication board, is the person’s
property
B. such as a wheelchair, cane, or communication board, is the person’s
property
C. such as wheelchair, cane, or communication board, are the person’s
property
D. such as a wheelchair, such as a cane, or a communication board, are
the person’s property
20. Also, don’t pet a blind person’s guide dog because distracting
could put the owner in danger.
A. a blind person’s guide dog
B. it
C. her
D. them
Answers and explanations start on page 659.

CHAPTER 9

Using Writing Mechanics
Lesson 1: Comma Use
As a general rule, commas indicate where readers would pause in a sentence
if they were reading it aloud. Below are specific guidelines for using
commas.

Key Ideas
In a compound sentence, use a comma before the coordinating
conjunction.
Be careful not to use a comma between two words or phrases joined
by and.
Insert a comma after an introductory word, phrase,
or clause.

Commas in Compound Sentences
In a compound sentence, place a comma immediately before the coordinating

conjunction.
EXAMPLES
Some people are insecure about hosting a party, but others are relaxed and
confident.
Many hosts have years of practice, and they have some organizational tips.
Watch out, though, for sentences that appear to be compound but are not.
Some sentences have one main clause but have a compound subject or a
compound predicate. If a sentence does not have two independent clauses, a
comma is not needed before the coordinating conjunction.
Incorrect: Planning, and list making are two key organizational techniques.
Correct: Planning and list making are two key organizational techniques.
Incorrect: Making a list reduces disorganization, and helps you feel in control.
Correct: Making a list reduces disorganization and helps you feel in control.

GED® TEST TIP
Read a sentence out loud to see if you hear a pause. Before you
insert a comma, be sure that you can base your decision on a
comma rule.

Commas after Introductory Elements
In general, a comma should follow an introductory word, phrase, or clause to
separate the introductory element from the main part of the sentence.
EXAMPLES

Introductory words:
Yes, listing your ideas can be very helpful.
However, making a list is only the first step.
Introductory phrases:
Giving it some thought, carefully draw up a guest list.
For a casual feel, have an open house.
On the day of the party, do as much as you can first thing in the morning.
By party time, you should be able to relax.
Introductory clauses:
Before you make a list, decide what kind of party you will have.
If you are a good cook, you might choose to have a dinner party.
Remember that only a subordinate clause at the beginning of a sentence
requires a comma after it. A subordinate clause at the end of the sentence
generally does not.
No comma: Decide what kind of party you will have before you make a list.

Practice 1.1
A. Directions: Insert commas where needed in the sentences below. If no
commas are required, write NC.
_____ 1. Train travel is more pleasant than riding a bus but it can be more
expensive.
_____ 2. When you’re on a train you can stand up and stretch if you need to.
_____ 3. Most trains have club cars where passengers can get snacks and
sometimes even sit at tables.
_____ 4. Unlike buses trains sometimes have seats that face each other.

_____ 5. Traveling through a scenic area you may find that your train has a
double-decker car that offers a better view.
_____ 6. Lowered airfares and many people’s unwillingness to spend long
hours in a train have contributed to the declining popularity of rail
travel.
B. Questions 7 through 9 refer to the following paragraphs.
Low-Fat Cooking
To have a more healthful diet, try cooking with less fat. It’s not as hard as
you think!
such as steaming, poaching, or baking. When you do
include oil in the preparation of your dish, use less of it. Vinegar can be used
without oil in salad
the flavor can be enhanced with fresh herbs.
Another tactic is to cut down on dairy fat. Avoid regular milk, cream, and
sour cream. Add low-fat dairy products or another liquid to your dish instead.
Many dairy foods come in a
to the palate, some are.
7.

such as steaming, poaching, or baking.
A. For starters, use cooking methods that require little or no oil or butter,
B. For starters use cooking methods that require little or no oil or butter
C. For starters use cooking methods that require little or no oil or butter,
D. For starters use cooking methods that require little, or no oil or butter,

8. Vinegar can be used without oil in salad
enhanced with fresh herbs.

the flavor can be

A. dressing, and
B. dressing and,
C. dressing, or
D. dressing, for example
9. Many dairy foods come in a

to the palate, some are.

A. low-fat version and though, not all of them may be pleasing

B. low-fat version, and though, not all of them may be pleasing,
C. low-fat version, and though, not all of them may be pleasing
D. low-fat version, and though not all of them may be pleasing
Answers and explanations start on page 659.

Commas in a Series
When three or more items are listed in a series, place commas between the
items:

Key Ideas
Separate the items in a series with commas.
Put commas around an appositive only if it gives nonessential details
about a noun.
Don’t put a comma between a subject and a verb.
Don’t use a comma between two items joined by and or or.

EXAMPLES
Keith, Darnelle, Marisol, and Doug are ready to take the GED® Test.
They have taken a class, studied together, and prepared well.
The comma before the final and or or is optional (for example, March 7,
March 14, or March 21). Placing a comma there is not tested on the
Reasoning through Language Arts Test, but using one there will help you
place commas correctly in the series. To use commas between the items in a
series, count the number of items listed and subtract one. That is the number
of commas you should use.

Commas with Appositives
An appositive is a word or group of words that gives more information about

a noun by renaming it.

GED® TEST TIP
When an option involves removing a comma, see if you can
apply a specific rule for using a comma in that place. If you
cannot, the comma should probably be removed.
EXAMPLES
Marisol, an experienced writer, feels confident about the essay.
Doug’s only sister, Gina, was the first in the family to receive a high school
equivalency degree.
To decide whether to set off an appositive with commas, mentally cross out
the appositive. Then ask, “Can I still identify the person, place, or thing
described in the sentence?” If you can, use commas around the appositive.
EXAMPLES
Mann College, a local community college, offers GED® Test courses.
Keith, who attended GED® Test classes for a year, has done well there.
Here you can identify the noun without the appositive. Each appositive adds
more information, but it is not essential to your understanding. Usually when
an appositive is renaming a proper noun, it is not essential.
On the other hand, if you cannot identify the person, place, or thing without
the appositive, do not set off the appositive with commas.
EXAMPLES
Keith and his friend Antoine plan to work in construction.
Students who study faithfully usually do well on the test.
In these examples, you cannot identify the nouns without the appositives.

You would ask, “Which friend?” and “Which students?” The appositives are
essential to your understanding and should not be set off by commas.

Comma Errors to Avoid
It is easy to overuse commas. Avoid this error by following these guidelines:
Do not use a comma between the subject and the verb.
Incorrect: Park College, is the school Doug hopes to attend.
Do not use a comma between two subjects, two verbs, or two other items
joined by and or or.
Incorrect: Science, and math are hard subjects for Keith.
Incorrect: Darnell writes practice essays, and reads.
Incorrect: They will review his application, and transcript.

Practice 1.2
A. Directions: Insert commas where needed in the sentences below. If no
commas are required, write NC.
_____ 1. Kwanzaa is a week-long African American holiday that celebrates
culture community and family.
_____ 2. Kwanzaa a wintertime holiday is based on an ancient African harvest
celebration.
_____ 3. It was developed in modern times by scholar Maulana Karenga.
_____ 4. Kwanzaa celebrations include rituals such as singing dancing
drumming and poetry reading.
_____ 5. The family lights one candle every day for each of seven principles:
unity self-determination responsibility cooperative economics

purpose creativity and faith.
_____ 6. A day during which people consider their moral worthiness marks
the end of Kwanzaa.
B. Questions 7 through 9 refer to the following paragraphs.
Childproofing Your Home
If you have small children, you no doubt appreciate the need to make your
home as safe as possible. It is a fact that
. Taking a few simple
measures might reduce the number of times you take your kids to the
emergency room.
Start by putting childproof locks on all cupboards in which
.
To keep babies and toddlers from entering dangerous areas, put baby gates in
doorways and install sleeves on doorknobs. Install safety locks on doors and
windows. Make sure that older
can open them in an emergency.
To prevent burns in the bathtub, keep the water temperature below 120°F.
Cover unused outlets with outlet plugs.
7. It is a fact that

.

A. home accidents are responsible for more children’s injuries than all
childhood diseases combined
B. home accidents, is responsible for more children’s injuries than all
childhood diseases combined
C. home accidents, are responsible for more children’s injuries, than all
childhood diseases combined
D. home accidents, being responsible for more children’s injuries than all
childhood diseases combined
8. Start by putting childproof locks on all cupboards in which
A. medicines poisons, or fragile objects are stored
B. medicines, poisons, or fragile objects are stored
C. medicines poisons, or fragile objects, are stored

.

D. medicines poisons, or fragile objects is stored
9. Make sure that older

can open them in an emergency.

A. children those ten and up
B. children, those ten, and up,
C. children, those ten and up,
D. children those ten and up,
Answers and explanations start on page 659.

Lesson 2: Capitalization
To recognize capitalization errors on the Reasoning through Language Arts
test and to use capital letters correctly in your response, follow these
guidelines.
Capitalize proper nouns. A proper noun is the name of a specific person,
place, thing, or idea. If a proper noun has two or more words, capitalize each
word.

Key Ideas
Capitalize proper nouns and adjectives.
Capitalize days of the week, months, and names of holidays but not
seasons.
Capitalize titles if they come before a person’s name or are used to
address the person.

EXAMPLES
Claude Normand is a major contributor to Portland Community Hospital.
The hospital is located on Camden Road in Portland, Maine.
The hospital and charities such as the American Cancer Society rely on

contributions from citizens.
All major religions, from Islam to Christianity, support giving to charity.
Note that the key words in addresses are proper nouns and are capitalized.
The key words include the names of streets, cities, states, and countries.
Do not capitalize common nouns, which do not refer to a specific person,
place, or thing.
EXAMPLE
Incorrect: Many Doctors volunteer at Clinics in the City.
Correct: Many doctors volunteer at clinics in the city.
Capitalize the names of proper adjectives. A proper adjective is formed
from a proper noun.

GED® TEST TIP
Use the “proper noun” test to determine if a word should be
capitalized. To capitalize, make sure the word or phrase is the
name of a person, place, or thing: “my uncle” is fine, and so is
“Uncle Leo.”
EXAMPLE
Mr. Normand has a French Canadian heritage.
Capitalize a title before a person’s name. Do not capitalize a title when it
appears without a person’s name unless it is used in direct address.
EXAMPLES
Title before name: Mr. Normand met recently with Dr. Halverson and
Mayor Maresky.
Title without name: The doctor and mayor were very receptive to his ideas.

Direct address: He said, “Thank you, Mayor, for listening to my proposal.”
Capitalize names of holidays, days of the week, and months. Do not
capitalize the names of seasons.
EXAMPLES
Memorial Day is always the last Monday in May and is a paid holiday.
The project will be completed by the end of spring.
Capitalize names of specific school courses and all languages.
EXAMPLE
I am taking Introduction to Computers 101, English, and math.

Practice 2
A. Directions: Correct the capitalization errors in the sentences below.
EXAMPLE:

2. My internist, doctor claudia McNally, referred me to Waterside.
3. The center’s Director, Ilana Harris, assigned me a physical therapist named
Ellie Royce.
4. Ellie studied physical therapy in her native London and used british
methods of treatment that relieved my pain quite effectively.
5. She also did therapy with me in the pool at Rainbow health club.
6. I finished my treatments just before labor day, and I feel 100 percent
better, thanks to Ellie.
B. Questions 7 through 9 refer to the following paragraphs.

An Unusual Breed
The Akita is a Japanese dog breed that dates to ancient times. The breed
has a special spiritual meaning for many. For example, when a child is born,
well-wishers give the family small statues of Akitas to express hopes for
future happiness and health. In the past,
allowed to own his
breed.
Akitas are massive, powerful dogs, used for hunting game and guarding.
Starting in the 17th century,
. In 1937, Akitas were brought to
.
7. In the past,

allowed to own this breed.

A. only Emperors and nobles were
B. only emperors and nobles were
C. only Emperors and Nobles were
D. only Emperors and nobles are
8. Starting in the 17th century,

.

A. they were trained to hunt game and waterfowl in the Mountains of
Japan
B. they were trained to hunt game and waterfowl, in the Mountains of
Japan
C. they were trained to hunt game and waterfowl in the mountains of
Japan
D. they were trained to hunt game, and waterfowl in the Mountains of
Japan
9. In 1937, Akitas were brought to
A. america by author Helen Keller
B. America by author Helen Keller
C. america by Author Helen Keller
D. america by author helen keller

.

Answers and explanations start on page 659.

Lesson 3: Possessives and Contractions
Some of the most common spelling errors involve possessives and
contractions. Follow these guidelines when spelling these words:
A possessive shows ownership. Use apostrophes with possessive nouns. Do
not use apostrophes with possessive pronouns.

Key Ideas
Use apostrophes with possessive nouns but not with possessive
pronouns.
Use an apostrophe to replace the missing letters in a contraction.
To decide whether to use a possessive or contraction, test to see
whether the full form of the contraction makes sense in the sentence.

EXAMPLES
Possessive nouns: friend’s car Marta’s map the dogs’ leashes
Possessive pronouns: his, hers, ours, yours, theirs, its
Correct: The car’s tires are new. The map is hers.
If a noun is singular or if it is plural but does not end in s, add an apostrophe
+ s to form the possessive.
Singular possessive: cat’s boss’s women’s
If a noun is plural and ends in s, add an apostrophe after the final s.
Plural possessive: workers’ ladies’
A singular possessive often sounds like a plural noun. Use an apostrophe only
with the possessive.

Correct: My company’s benefits (possessive) make it one of the best
companies (plural) to work for.

GED® TEST TIP
Contractions are acceptable in informal speech and writing.
However, try to avoid them in more formal writing situations,
such as the GED® Extended Response.
A contraction shortens two words by combining the second word with the
first and leaving out one or more letters. An apostrophe takes the place of the
missing letters. Some contractions combine pronouns with verbs.
EXAMPLES
here is → here’s there is → there’s I am → I’m
Other contractions combine verbs with the word not.
EXAMPLES
have not → haven’t do not → don’t will not → won’t
Be careful to use the apostrophe in place of the missing letter or letters.
Notice that the correct position is not necessarily the point at which the two
words come together.
Incorrect: You do’nt have to come with us tonight. (do’nt should be don’t)
Some possessives and contractions sound the same (your and you’re, its and
it’s, their and they’re). To determine whether to use a possessive or a
contraction, substitute the two words that make up the contraction. If the
substitution makes sense, the contraction is correct. If not, use a possessive.

Practice 3

A. Directions: Underline the correct word or words to complete each
sentence.
EXAMPLE: I’m (your, you’re) downstairs neighbor, and (I’ve, Iv’e) been
having trouble sleeping lately because of noise late at night.
1. (Theirs, There’s) a noise that sounds like the thumping beat of rock music.
2. I (ca’nt, can’t) be sure (who’s, whose) responsible, but (its, it’s) coming
from your apartment.
3. My roommates and I have discussed this, and (were, we’re) running out of
patience.
4. You should talk to your children if the stereo is (theirs, there’s).
5. Please be considerate of your neighbors just as we are considerate of
(our’s, ours).
B. Questions 6 through 8 refer to the paragraphs that follow.
Sales Trainees Wanted
Do you have a warm smile? Do people feel comfortable with you? Do you
have a friendly phone manner? Do you have good organizational skills? Are
you good at solving problems? If you’ve answered yes to these
skills atMacro Software.
Macro Software is one of the industry leaders in software distribution.
to offer a mail order service that was the first of its kind. We
pride ourselves on our high-quality products, quick delivery times, and
excellent customer service.
We are currently hiring sales trainees for our Miami office. Interested
to Jim Burns, Macro Software, 904 Ocean Drive, Miami,
Florida.
6. If you’ve answered yes to these

skills at Macro Software.

A. questions, we need you’re
B. questions we need you’re
C. questions, we needs you’re
D. questions, we need your
7.

to offer a mail order service that was the first of its kind.
A. In addition to hour chain of stores, we’re proud
B. In addition to our chain of stores, we’re proud
C. In addition to our chain of stores, were proud
D. In addition, to our chain of stores, were proud

8. Interested
Miami, Florida.

to Jim Burns, Macro Software, 904 Ocean Drive,

A. party’s should send they’re resumes
B. parties should send their resumes
C. parties should send they’re resume’s
D. parties should send they’re resumes
Answers and explanations start on page 660.

Lesson 4: Homonyms
Key Ideas
Homonyms are words that sound the same but have different spellings and
different meanings.

GED® TEST TIP

Possessives, contractions, and homonyms are the kinds of
spelling items that appear on the GED® Test. Study the ones
that give you problems.
Homonyms are words that sound alike but are spelled differently and have
different meanings. The following chart lists homonyms and other commonly
confused words that people often misspell.
Word

Meaning

Word in Sentence

accept

to receive willingly

I accept responsibility for my
actions.

except

excluding

Everyone went except Molly.

affect

to have an impact

Did the medicine affect you?

effect

a result

The effects will wear off soon.

board

a piece of wood

Nail that board to the other one.

bored

not interested

Rami was bored in wood shop class.

brake

to stop; something that
stops

Put your foot on the brake!

break

to shatter in pieces

Be careful, or you’ll break your arm.

close

to shut

Please close that bag.

clothes

something to wear

I’m going to return those clothes.

desert

to leave behind; arid
land

Don’t desert a friend in need.

dessert

sweet food served after
dinner

They offer dessert to their guests.

fare

money paid by a
passenger

The subway fare was just raised.

fair

just, right

A lot of people think it’s not fair.

forth

forward

Let’s go forth!

fourth

in the 4th position

It is our fourth trip in three days.

grate

to shred

We need to grate some potatoes.

great

fantastic; of large size

It’s going to be a great casserole.

hole

opening

There’s a hole in the sweater.

whole

entire

Soon the whole thing will fall apart.

know

to understand

I don’t know what’s wrong with him.

no

opposite of yes

He has no sense.

led

past of the verb lead;
brought

He led the worker to the supply
room.

lead

a material in pencils

They gave her some lead pencils.

lessen

to decrease

Will you lessen the sugar in the
recipe?

lesson

something you learn;
moral

That will teach him a lesson.

male

a boy or man

There are both females and males in
the Army.

mail

to send a message
through the
post office; a message
sent

Send the letter through the mail.

passed

went by

Have you passed the post office?

past

opposite of future

Yes, in the past.

peace

opposite of war

When will there be world peace?

piece

a part

That’s only a piece of the problem.

principal head of a school

The principal has called a meeting.

principle a guiding rule; a moral

He has no principles.

than

compared with

I used to have more money than you.

then

after that; at that time

Then I spent most of mine.

there

at that place

The car is over there.

their

belonging to them

It is their car.

they’re

they are

They’re going to sell it.

to

indicates a direction

Go to the grocery store.

too

also, in addition

Sharmaine will go, too.

two

the number 2

Buy me two loaves of bread.

Practice 4
A. Directions: Underline the correct word or words to complete each
sentence.
EXAMPLE: The chairman of the (board, bored) has called this meeting.
1. This is our (fourth, forth) meeting on the topic of funding.
2. We don’t (no, know) any other sources of funding.
3. The director of the organization brought up this (whole, hole) issue.
4. Next (weak, week), we plan to submit a proposal.
5. We worry that a request for funding may (affect, effect) our nonprofit
status.
6. In the (past, passed), we could rely on government funding.
B. Questions 7 through 9 refer to the paragraphs that follow.
Equal Pay for Equal Work?
In 1963, women earned only 59 percent of the wages men earned. In 1997,
the figure was still just 74 percent. Women
?
One explanation is that the statistics include older women.
prevail. In contrast, women under the age of 25 earn about 92 percent of what
men earn. However, upon closer examination, this theory falls flat. Women in

entry-level jobs have always earned salaries similar to those of their male
peers. The problem is that women don’t receive the same raises and promotions that men get.
7. Women

?

A. have logged grate achievements in the workforce, so why don’t they
receive fair pay
B. has logged great achievements in the workforce, so why don’t they
receive fair pay
C. have logged great achievements in the workforce, so why don’t they
receive fair pay
D. have logged great achievements in the workforce, so why don’t they
receive fare pay
8.

prevail.
A. In principle, the age gap could account for the wage gap because older
women still work in jobs in which attitudes and conditions of the past
B. In principal, the age gap could account for the wage gap because older
women still working in jobs in which attitudes and conditions of the
past
C. In principal, the age gap could account for the wage gap because older
women still work in jobs in which attitudes and conditions of the
passed
D. In principal, the age gap could account four the wage gap because
older women still work in jobs in which attitudes and conditions of the
past

9.
A. The effect is that, as women get older, the gap between men’s and
women’s salaries becomes greater.
B. The affect is that, as women get older, the gap between men’s and
women’s salaries become greater.
C. The affect is that, as women get older, the gap between men’s and

women’s salaries becomes grater.
D. The affect is that as women get older, the gap between men’s and
women’s salaries becomes greater.
Answers and explanations start on page 660.

Using Writing Mechanics Practice
Questions
Questions 1 through 5 refer to the following paragraphs.
Single Parents and Relationships
Children of single parents don’t exactly cheer their parents on at the start
of a new relationship.
and generally try to ruin their parents’
chances. If you are a parent in this situation, you need to
your
children that you love them. However, also let
doing the right
thing.
Your children may become quickly attached to a new date, even within the
course of an evening. Alternatively, they may fear that you plan to marry
each potential partner you bring home. For these reasons, it makes sense not
to introduce all your dates to your children. Try to see your dates at times
when
.
Once you become committed to a particular person, it’s important to
include your partner in family events gradually. Don’t be surprised if your
children have a negative reaction to your new partner. This time may be
difficult for your kids. They’re not used to seeing you with a new partner, and
they may be realizing that a reconciliation with your ex-spouse is impossible.
If communication breaks
family counseling. Children may be
more willing to share their worries and complaints in that setting.
1.

and generally try to ruin their parents’ chances.

A. Instead children may have tantrums erase phone messages,
B. Instead, children may have tantrums, erase phone messages,
C. Instead, children may have tantrums erase phone messages,
D. Instead children, may has tantrums, erase phone messages,
2. If you are a parent in this situation, you need to
that you love them.

your children

A. understand, and showing
B. understand. And show
C. understand and show
D. understand, and you show
3. However, also let

doing the right thing.

A. you’re kids know that you feel your
B. you’re kids know that you feel you’re
C. your kids know that you feel your
D. your kids know that you feel you’re
4. Try to see your dates at times when

.

A. you’re children are’nt at home
B. your children are’nt at home
C. your children aren’t at home
D. your children isn’t at home
5. If communication breaks

family counseling.

A. down will consider
B. down, consider
C. down. Consider
D. down, and consider
Questions 6 through 10 refer to the following paragraphs.

The History of Daylight Saving Time
We set our clocks forward every spring and back every fall, but few of us
stop to think about why we do this. One of the main reasons for daylight
saving
. In the evening, we use lights, TVs, and electrical
appliances. Daylight saving time makes the period between sunset and
bedtime one hour shorter, and therefore less electricity is used.
With daylight saving time, each time zone changes
. Time
zones were introduced by the railroads to make schedules standard across the
country. In 1918,
the rail time zones official. That same year, a
second law put the country on daylight saving time for the rest of World War
I. The law was unpopular, however, and it was repealed seven months later.
Daylight saving time was also in force during most of World War II.
From 1945 to 1966, each state and town could decide whether to observe
daylight saving time. The resulting inconsistencies created a
great deal of confusion.
to put out new schedules every time a
state started or ended daylight saving time. Then came the Uniform Time Act
of 1966, which established starting and
. This law was amended
in 1986, when the starting date was moved almost a month earlier to save
energy.
6. One of the main reasons for daylight saving

.

A. time, is to save energy
B. time is to save energy
C. time, are to save energy
D. times, is to save energy
7. With daylight saving time, each time zone changes
A. it’s standard time by an hour
B. its standard time by an hour
C. it’s standard time by an our
D. it’s standard time, by an hour

.

8. In 1918,

the rail time zones official.

A. congress passed a law making
B. Congress passed a law making
C. congress past a law making
D. congress passed a law made
9.

to put out new schedules every time a state started or ended
daylight saving time.
A. For example, radio and TV stations had
B. For example radio and TV stations have
C. For example radio and TV stations had
D. For example radio and TV stations, had

10. Then came the Uniform Time Act of 1966, which established starting and
.
A. ending dates for daylight saving time, in the spring and fall
B. ending date’s for daylight saving time, in the spring and fall
C. ending dates for daylight saving time in the spring and fall
D. ending dates for daylight saving time, in the Spring and Fall
Questions 11 through 15 refer to the following paragraphs.
Rules and Regulations
Thank you
. Before using our facility, please read these rules
and regulations carefully.
When you enter the pool or exercise room, a security guard
will request to see your card and will deny you entrance without it.
Guests are welcome to use the pool and exercise room, but only when
accompanied by members. The guest fee is $10 per day. When bringing
guests, please have them sign in at the desk in the lobby. They will be given a
guest card for the day.

Pool safety is very important.
and other flotation devices are
available for your use. Do not hesitate to ask lifeguards for help. Children
under the age of 12 must swim in the
by an adult. Swimming
classes are available to help both children and adults improve their skills.
You must
for any class you wish to take. Members receive a
significant discount. Registration may be limited to a certain number of
participants.
11. Thank you

.

A. for joining Spring Valley Community center
B. for joining Spring Valley community center
C. for joining Spring Valley Community Center
D. for joining, Spring Valley Community center
12.
A. Please have your membership card with you at all times when your in
the building.
B. Please have you’re membership card with you at all times when you’re
in the building.
C. Please have your membership card with you at all times’ when your in
the building.
D. Please have your membership card with you at all times when you’re
in the building.
13.

and other flotation devices are available for your use.
A. If you are a weak swimmer, life jackets
B. If you are a week swimmer life jackets
C. If you are a week swimmer, life jackets
D. If you are a week swimmer, live jackets

14. Children under the age of 12 must swim in the

by an adult.

A. children’s pool, unless they’re supervised
B. childrens’ pool, unless they’re supervised
C. children’s pool, unless their supervised
D. children’s pool unless they’re supervised
15. You must

for any class you wish to take.

A. register, pay
B. register and pay
C. register. And pay
D. register. Pay
Questions 16 through 20 refer to the following paragraphs.
Racial Profiling
African American and Hispanic motorists are much more likely to be
stopped by police
no apparent reason. What’s their offense? It
may be that these individuals have been targeted because of their race.
Blacks and Hispanics, who some police officers believe are more likely to
commit crimes, have been systematically targeted by police. Police statistics
occurs in every geographic location. Motorists, pedestrians, and
airline passengers have been searched. The police do not make class
of every station in life have been victims of this practice.
The statistical evidence shows a clear pattern. On one Maryland highway,
73 percent of those stopped by police were African American, even though
blacks represented only 17 percent of all drivers. Hispanics make up only 8
percent of the population in
of drivers stopped there are
Hispanic.
dispute the studies that document racial profiling.
They maintain that the problem has been confined to a small number of
officers and can be remedied easily.
16. African American and Hispanic motorists are much more likely to be
stopped by police
no apparent reason.

A. then their white counterparts, often for
B. then, their white counterparts, often for
C. than their white counterparts, often for
D. then their white counterparts, often four
17. Police statistics

occurs in every geographic location.

A. from 23 States show that this policy, called racial profiling
B. from 23 states, show that this policy, called racial profiling
C. from 23 states show that this policy, called racial profiling,
D. from 23 states show that this policy, called racial profiling
18. The police do not make class
been victims of this practice.

of every station in life have

A. distinctions. For nonwhites
B. distinctions, for nonwhites
C. distinctions moreover nonwhites
D. distinctions nonwhites
19. Hispanics make up only 8 percent of the population in
drivers stopped there are Hispanic.
A. illinois, yet 30 percent
B. Illinois, yet 30 percent
C. illinois yet 30 percent
D. illinois, and 30 percent
20.

dispute the studies that document racial profiling.
A. However police superintendents chiefs of police, and other law
enforcement officials
B. However, police superintendents, chiefs of police, and other law
enforcement officials
C. However, police superintendents chiefs of police, and other law
enforcement officials,

of

D. However, police superintendents chiefs of police and other law
enforcement officials
Answers and explanations start on page 660.

UNIT 2

Mathematical Reasoning
About the Test
The GED® Mathematical Reasoning Test evaluates your ability to solve
mathematical problems and apply mathematics to a variety of contexts. You
will have 90 minutes to answer approximately 46 questions based on the
following:
Quantitative Reasoning (45%), which includes problems with positive
and negative whole numbers, decimals, and fractions; ratios,
proportions, and percents; data and statistics; and geometric
measurement
Algebraic Reasoning (55%), which includes expressions, polynomials,
equations, inequalities, linear equations, quadratic equations, and
patterns and functions. A variety of formats will assess evaluating,
solving, and graphing skills in algebra.
You will need a minimum score of 145 to pass the Mathematical Reasoning
Test, which is one of the four tests you will need to pass in order to earn a
high school equivalency diploma.

Tools

Calculator For most of the test, you will be able to use either a handheld or
an online version of the Texas Instruments TI-30XS MultiView™
scientific calculator. You can access the online calculator by clicking on this
icon. You can also take your own handheld TI-30XS MultiView™ calculator
to use on test day.
For the first five questions on the test, you will not be able to use the
calculator. You can take up to 12 of the 90 minutes with these questions.
Check all of your work carefully before you leave this section of the test. You
will not be able to return to these problems once the online calculator is
enabled.
If you forget how to use a specific calculator function, you will be able to
access a Calculator Reference Sheet from the computer screen by clicking
on this icon.
Formula Sheet A copy of this formula sheet appears on page 413 of this
book. You will be able to access these formulas by clicking on this icon.
Other formulas that appear in this book should be memorized.

Symbol Selector On some fill-in-the-blank problems, you will need to use a
symbol from the symbol selector toolbar. You can enable it when the icon to
the right shows up on the light blue toolbar at the top of your screen.

At the testing center, you will be given a dry erase marker and a wipe-off
board that you can use as scratch paper.

Computer-Based Mathematics Test Formats
Many of the questions will be multiple-choice with four options (A through
D). You will click on the best answer.

A painter needs to cover the walls of four rooms in two coats of paint.

Each room measures 4 ft by 8 ft, and the ceiling is 10 feet high in each.
Each gallon of paint covers 32 square feet. How many gallons of paint
does he need?
A. 2
B. 60
C. 128
D. 256

GED® TEST TIP
Follow all directions carefully. For example, in this fill-in-theblank problem, you are asked to type the answer, simplify the
expression, and use the symbol selector to complete the result.
Fill-in-the-blank questions will require you to type a numerical answer to a
problem or to enter an equation by clicking to open the symbol selector and
then inserting the symbol in the box. You may also be asked to type a word
or phrase in the box to answer a question about your thought process.

Type your answer in the box. You may use numbers, symbols, and/or
text in your answer.
Simplify the expression completely. Leave your answer in radical form.

(NOTE: Click the symbol selector when you need to insert the radical
sign.)

Drop-down questions give you the opportunity to click the word “Select” and
choose the option that correctly completes the statement.

Sarah runs an open babysitting service on Saturday nights so that
parents in the neighborhood can enjoy a night out. The chart below
shows the number of children in attendance each hour.
Hour

# of children

5 p.m.

2

6 p.m.

4

7 p.m.

5

8 p.m.

6

9 p.m.

5

10 p.m.

2

11 p.m.

2

The number of children in attendance ranged from

to

Drag-and-drop items require you to click on an image, number, or symbol
and to drag and drop it to a specified location on the computer screen to
create an expression, equation, or inequality.

A clown creates an equation that relates his data of each child’s head
size to the length of the balloon he needs to make them a proper
balloon-animal hat. For each child, he needs a balloon five times as long
as the child’s head size, plus of an inch extra. Complete a linear
equation for child A, where x is the size of the child’s head in inches and

y is the length of the balloon in inches.
Click on the variables and numbers you want to select and drag them
into the boxes.

Hot-spot questions are based on a graphic such as a number line, coordinate
grid, or geometric figure. You will need to click on a specific place or places
on the figure.

GED® TEST TIP
You may need to click on one point or on more than one point
to correctly answer a hot-spot question. Check the finished
graphic against the question before moving on. Make sure that
you have completed the task by creating all required points.

Jessica has 20 hours a week to spend making scarves. Each week, she
spends 2 hours purchasing the materials. Each scarf takes 3 hours to

complete. The inequality 2 + 3s ≤20 represents the number of scarves, s,
Jessica can make in one week.
Using the number line below, click each number to plot each possible
value for s.
(NOTE: If you need to remove a point, hold the cursor over the point
and left-click the mouse.)

Using the Texas Instruments TI-30XS MultiView™
Calculator
Throughout this unit, you will practice using the TI-30XS MultiViewTM
calculator. Remember: You do not have to use the calculator to solve
problems; only use it if it is relevant to the problem or if you believe it will be
helpful.

GED® TEST TIP
You are encouraged to purchase a handheld version of the
Texas Instruments TI-30XS MultiView™ calculator for
practice as you work through this book. You can buy one at
office or school supply stores or online.
Below is a picture of the handheld version and some issues to keep in mind.

TI-30XS MultiView™ Calculator
The handheld version has an On/Off button at the lower-left hand side.
To use the online version of the calculator, click the calculator icon (see
page 213) to open the calculator in a new window. Use your mouse to
drag the calculator to the side of the computer screen so that it does not
cover the problem. When you are finished with a calculation, click on
the “X” at the top of the window to close the calculator.
When you are finished with a calculation, use the enter button. (There is
no “equal sign” button on this calculator.)
Use the white numeric keypad to enter numbers, the decimal point, and

the negative sign (−) for a negative number such as −13 .
The operation keys, on the right, allow you to add, subtract, multiply,
and divide. (Use the minus sign here for subtraction; use the negative
sign (−) on the keypad to indicate a negative number.)
Use the bright green 2nd button at the left of the calculator to activate
the 2nd functions (in bright green) above the keys. Some of the main
ones are square root, exponent, percent, and mixed number functions.
The four arrows at the top right of the calculator allow you to move the
onscreen cursor up, down, left, or right as needed. The delete key to the
left of the arrows allows you to correct mistakes as you work.
Every time you begin a calculation, press the clear button above the
operation keys to clear the calculator’s memory.

Accessing the Symbol Selector Toolbar
Some questions will instruct you to use a particular symbol from the “symbol
selector.” This is not available for all problems, but this icon shows up when
you need the toolbar:
When you click on this icon, a new window will open up with these symbols:

GED® TEST TIP
If you do not know all of these symbols now, copy them on a
piece of paper or in a math notebook. Write meanings and
examples for them as you encounter them in this book so you
have mastery of them before the test.

Click on a symbol to insert it in the correct place in an expression, equation,
or inequality. When you are finished with the toolbar, click on the “X” at the
top of the window to close the window.

Using the Wipe-Off Board
Even with all of the computer-based tools, you may still feel the need for
some scratch paper to do the following:
Write down the relevant numbers that you need to answer a specific
question.
Solve the problem by hand and use the calculator to check your work.
Make a drawing or a diagram to help you picture a situation that is
described in a word problem. This is an important strategy when
working with measurement and geometry problems that do not contain a
graphic.
At the testing center, you will be provided with a wipe-off board and dry
erase marker, similar to the material shown at the right. Make use of the
board throughout the Mathematical Reasoning Test and ask for a new one if
you feel that you need it.

CHAPTER 1

Number Sense and Problem Solving
Lesson 1: Compare and Order Numbers
Key Ideas
When ordering numbers, compare the same place values between
numbers.
Round numbers to estimate answers or eliminate answer choices in
multiple-choice questions.

Place Value
Numbers are part of your everyday life. Whether you’re paying with cash,
reading bus schedules, or changing television channels, you’re using whole
numbers.
The value of a number depends on the place value of its digits. On the placevalue chart below, note that the value of a digit increases as you move to the
left.

In the whole number shown on the chart, 1 has the greatest value. The
number would be read as “one thousand four hundred seventy-nine.”

GED® TEST TIP
It’s important to know the inequality symbols below.
< means “is less than”
≤ means “is less than or equal to”
> means “is greater than”
≥ means “is greater than or equal to”

Comparing and Ordering Values
To order numbers, you need to compare the value of their digits. Align the
place values of the numbers you are comparing. Start at the left and compare
the value of the first digit of each number.
Example 1: Place the numbers 342, 98, and 317 in order from least to
greatest.
1. Compare the first digit in each number. Since 98 is a two-digit number,
and the other numbers are three-digit numbers, 98 has the smallest
value.

2. Next, compare the first digit of the remaining numbers. Since both
numbers have the same digit (3) in the hundreds place, compare the
digits in the tens place. Since 1 is less than 4, 317 is less than 342.

Rounding Numbers
Place value is also essential to rounding numbers.
Example 2: Round 2451 to the nearest hundred.
1. Locate the place value that you want to round to. Then look at the place
value to the right. If the digit to the right is 5 or greater, round up. If the
digit to the right is less than 5, don't change the number in the hundreds
place.
The value to the right of the hundreds place is a 5. Round up.
2. Round up the digit in the hundreds place. Then change the digits to the
right of the hundreds place to zeros.
2451 rounds up to 2500

Practice 1
A. Write the digit from the number below that corresponds to the listed

place value. The first one is done for you.
1,436,879
____4 1. hundred thousands
____ 2. hundreds
____ 3. ones
____ 4. millions
____ 5. thousands
____ 6. tens
____ 7. ten thousands
B. Round these numbers as directed.
8. Round 544 to the nearest hundred.
9. Round 76 to the nearest ten.
10. Round 1058 to the nearest hundred.
11. Round 11,632 to the nearest thousand.
12. Round 1525 to the nearest thousand.
13. Round 84 to the nearest hundred.
C. In each of the following pairs, which number is greater?
14. 100 or 89
15. 339 or 341
16. 1099 or 1145

17. 125,391 or 119,450
D. Write these numbers in order from least to greatest.
18. 23 18 45 39
19. 111 89 109 91
20. 1087 932 909 1139
21. 1429 1420 1432 1425
22. 12,071 11,098 12,131
23. 15,356 15,309 15,298
E. Choose the one best answer to each question.
24. When stacking items, the heaviest items should be placed at the
bottom. Starting at the bottom, in what order should items weighing 45
pounds, 40 pounds, 50 pounds, and 48 pounds be stacked?
A. 40, 45, 48, 50
B. 45, 50, 40, 48
C. 50, 48, 45, 40
D. 50, 40, 45, 48
25. Which of the following correctly shows 1,543,976 rounded to the
nearest hundred thousand?
A. 2,000,000
B. 1,600,000
C. 1,500,000
D. 1,540,000
Answers and explanations begin on page 661.

Lesson 2: Whole Number Operations
Key Ideas
Add when combining amounts and subtract when finding the difference.
Align place-value columns when adding or subtracting.
Always look to the next place-value column to regroup.

Addition and Subtraction
You use addition when you need to combine amounts. The answer in an
addition problem is called the sum, or total. When you are adding, it’s
helpful to stack the numbers in a column. Be sure to line up the place-value
columns and then work from right to left, starting with the ones column.
Sometimes the digits in a place-value column add up to 10 or more. When
this happens, you will need to regroup to the next place value.

GED® TEST TIP
Another way to check answers is to round the numbers in a
problem and find an approximate answer.
Example 1: Add 40 + 129 + 24.
1. Align the numbers you want to add on the ones column. Working from
right to left, add the ones column first. Since the ones column totals 13,
write the 3 in the ones column and regroup, or carry, the 1 ten to the
tens column.

2. Add the tens column, including the regrouped 1.

3. Then add the hundreds column. Since there is only one value, write the
1 hundred in the answer.

You subtract when you want to find the difference between amounts. Write
the greater number on top, and align the amounts on the ones column. You
may also need to regroup as you subtract.
Example 2: If Sue is 57 and Kathy is 38, how many years older is Sue?
1. Find the difference in their ages. Start with the ones column. Since 7 is
less than the number being subtracted (8), regroup, or borrow, 1 ten
from the tens column. Add the regrouped amount to the ones column.
Now subtract 17 – 8 in the ones column.

2. Regrouping 1 ten from the tens column left 4 tens. Subtract 4 – 3 and
write the result in the tens column of your answer. Check: 19 + 38 =
57.

Sue is 19 years older than Kathy.
Example 3: Find the difference between 205 and 67.
1. Subtract. Start with the ones column. Since 5 is less than the number
being subtracted (7), regroup. Since there are 0 tens in the tens column,
regroup 1 hundred from the hundreds column. From 10 tens, regroup 1
ten to the ones column. Now subtract 15−7 in the ones column.

2. Regrouping 1 ten from the tens column left 9 tens. Subtract 9−6, and
write the result in the tens column of your answer.

3. Regrouping 1 hundred from the hundreds column left 1 hundred.
Subtract the hundreds column: 1−0. Check: 138 + 67 = 205.

Practice 2.1
A. Solve.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

6.
7.
8.
B. Rewrite the problems in columns before solving.
9. 20+12+33=
10. 245−131=
11. 30+75+75=
12. 378−85=
13. 144+238+101=
14. 545−89=
15. 2095+324=
16. 1250−350=
17. 10,326+982=
18. 15,890−705=
19. 108,755+22,442=
20. 44,789−13,890=
C. Choose the one best answer to each question.
21. What is the total weight, in pounds, of the boxes below?

A. 78
B. 88
C. 150
D. 160

22. Celia’s share for lunch is $7. If she pays with a $20 bill, how much
change should she get?
A. $3
B. $7
C. $13
D. $27
Answers and explanations begin on page 661.

Multiplication and Division
You multiply to combine the same amount multiple times. For example,
instead of adding 24+24+24, you could multiply 24 by 3. If a problem asks
you to find the product of two or more numbers, you should multiply.
Example 4: Find the product of 24 and 63.
1. Align place values as you rewrite the problem in a column. Multiply
the ones place of the top number by the ones place of the bottom
number: 4×3=12. Write the 2 in the ones place in the first partial
product. Regroup the 1 ten.

2. Multiply the tens place in the top number by 3: 2×3=6. Then add the
regrouped amount: 6+ 1=7. Write the 7 in the tens place in the partial
product.

3. Now multiply by the tens place of 63. Write a placeholder 0 in the
ones place in the second partial product, since you’re really multiplying
by 60. Then multiply the ones place of the top number by 6: 4×6=24.
Write 4 in the partial product and regroup the 2. Multiply 2×6=12. Add
the regrouped 2: 12+2=14.

4. Add the partial products to find the total product: 72+1440=1512.
To divide means to find how many equal parts an amount can be divided
into. The amount being divided is called the dividend. The number you are
dividing by is the divisor, and the answer to a division problem is the
quotient.
Example 5: At a garage sale, 3 children sold their old toys for a total of $54.
If they share the money equally, how much money should each child
receive?
1. Divide the total amount ($54) by the number of ways the money is to
be split (3). Work from left to right. How many times does 3 go into 5?
Write the answer 1 directly above the 5 in the dividend. Since 3×1=3,,
subtract 5−3=2.

2. Continue dividing. Bring down the 4 from the ones place in the
dividend. How many times does 3 go into 24? Write the answer 8

directly above the 4 in the dividend. Since 3×8=24, subtract 24−24=0.

Each child should receive $18.
Example 6: Divide 1006÷4.
1. Divide the total amount (1006) by 4. Work from left to right. Since 4 doesn’t divide into 1, use the next place value in the dividend. How
many times does 4 go into 10? Write the answer 2 directly above the
first 0 in the dividend. Since 4×2=8, subtract 10−8=2.

2. Continue dividing. Bring down the 0 from the tens place in the
dividend. How many times does 4 go into 20? Write the answer 5
directly above the second 0 in the dividend. Since 4×5=20, subtract
20−20=0. Bring down the 6 from the ones place in the dividend. How
many times does 4 go into 6? Write the answer 1 above the 6 in the
dividend. Since 4×1=4, subtract 6−4=2. Write the remainder of 2 as
part of the quotient.

By reviewing and memorizing multiplication tables, you can save yourself
precious time on the GED® Mathematical Reasoning Test.

Practice 2.2
A. Solve.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

10.
11.
12.
B. Solve. If multiplying more than two numbers, find the product of two
numbers before multiplying by the next number, and so on.
13. 50×5=
14. 179÷4=
15. 5×6×10=
16. 1004÷5=
17. 25×3×2=
18. 7452×9=
19. 10,760÷20=
20. 12×8×4=
21. 144,140÷12=
C. Choose the one best answer to each question.
22. A fruit juice container holds 16 servings. If the serving size is 6
ounces, how many ounces does the container hold in all?
A. 10
B. 22
C. 76
D. 96
23. A cashier has fifteen $5 bills. How much money does he have?
A. $15
B. $25
C. $75
D. $150
D. For question 24, write your answer on the line provided.
24. How many 2-foot lengths can be cut from the string shown below?

Answers and explanations begin on page 661.

Lesson 3: GED® Test Calculator Skills
Key Ideas
For many questions, you may use either a handheld or online version of
the TI-30XS MultiViewTM scientific calculator.
Use the calculator when you think it will save you time or improve your
accuracy.
Learn the placement of the keys and how to perform specific functions
before you take the test.
You will have access to an online or handheld calculator for many questions
on the Mathematical Reasoning Test and for some questions on the Social
Studies and Science Tests. If you wish to use a handheld calculator, you will
likely need to bring your own. It must be the Texas Instruments TI-30XS
MultiViewTM, shown here. The online version will be available when the
calculator icon appears at the top of the computer screen. You will click on
the icon to open the calculator and use the mouse to move it so that it does
not cover the problem. See page 216 for more calculator basics.

Look at the reproduction of the calculator below and follow the examples that
demonstrate how to use the calculator’s operation keys.

GED® TEST TIP
You can buy a handheld TI-30XS MultiViewTM calculator for
practice as you work through this study guide. It may be
available online, at office supply stores, or other places where
calculators are sold.
Example 1: Add 63 + 97 + 58 + 32 + 81.
1. Always clear a calculator before starting a new computation. On the
TI-30XS MultiViewTM, use the clear key.

2. Enter each number followed by the plus sign. As you type, the numbers
and plus signs will appear on the calculator’s screen. If you make a
mistake, press delete to go back and reenter a number
63 + 97 + 58 + 32 + 81
3. Press enter to find the total.

The total, 331, will appear on the right-hand side of the display:

Example 2: Find the difference between 15,789 and 9,332.
1. Always clear a calculator before starting a new computation.

2. Enter the greater number first, followed by the minus operator.

NOTE: Use the minus key that is on the right side of the calculator
with the other operation symbols. Don’t use the (-) key at the bottom of
the calculator; that key is used to enter a negative number
3. Enter the number being subtracted.

4. Press the enter key to find the answer.

The answer 6457 will appear on the right-hand side of the display.

Example 3: Find the product of 309 and 68.
1. Always clear a calculator before starting a new computation.

2. Enter the first number, followed by the multiplication operator. (The
multiplication sign will appear in the display as an asterisk rather than
an ×, but the multiplication key looks like an ×.)

3. Enter the next number.
68
4. Press the enter key to find the product.

The answer 21012 will appear on the right-hand side of the display.

21012
Example 4: Divide 12,456 by 12.
1. Always clear a calculator before starting a new computation.

2. Enter the number to be divided first, followed by the division operator.

3. Enter the number you are dividing by.
12
4. Press the enter key to find the quotient.

The answer 1038 will appear on the right-hand side of the display.
1038

Practice 3.1
A. Practice solving the following problems on your calculator.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

6.
7.
8.
9.
B. Choose the one correct answer to each question.
10. Dan bought a used car with 16,741 miles on it. If the car now has
42,920 miles on it, how many miles has Dan put on the car?
A. 16,741
B. 26,179
C. 42,920
D. 59,661
11. A shipment of 20 computers arrived at a warehouse. If each computer
is valued at $995, what is the total value of the shipment?
A. $995
B. $1015
C. $1990
D. $19,900
Answers and explanations begin on page 661.

Using the 2nd Key for a Second Function
To access some of the functions on the TI-30XS MultiViewTM, you need to
press the 2nd key in the upper left corner of the keypad. This bright green key
will activate the second function also shown in green above the
corresponding key. To access the second function of a key, press the 2nd key
first—do not press it at the same time as the function key. High-lighted below

are two commonly used second functions—square root and percent. Use the
process shown here for all 2nd function keys.

For more information about square roots, see page 320.
Remember: For all 2nd functions, (1) press the 2nd key first to activate the

2nd function, (2) press the key, and (3) enter the numbers.
Example 6: Find the part if you are given the percent and the whole. Find 10
percent of 500.

Example 7: Find the percent if you are given the whole and the part. What
percent of 240 is 60?

For more information about percents, see pages 264–275.

Practice 3.2
A. Practice solving the following problems on your calculator.

1.
2.
3.
4. Find 20% of 680.
5. Find 10% of 1250.
6. 15 is what percent of 300?
7. Find 5% of 40.
8. Find 30% of 450.
9. 20 is what percent of 400?
B. Choose the one best answer to each question.
10. Tanya paid 20 percent of $1680 as a down payment. How much was
the down payment?
A. $20
B. $168
C. $336
D. $840
11. Aaron received a credit of $48 on a purchase of $960. What percent of
$960 is $48?
A. 5%
B. 20%
C. 48%
D. 912%
Answers and explanations begin on page 661.

Lesson 4: Word Problems

Key Ideas
Successful math problem solvers use a five-step process.
Read carefully to understand the question and select only the
information needed to answer it.
When you have found an answer, check that it makes sense.
To pass the Mathematical Reasoning Test, you will need to solve word
problems. These questions are easier to manage if you use a five-step
problem-solving process. Practice this process with word problems in this
book.
Step 1. What is the question asking me to find?
Read the problem carefully. State the question in your own words.
Step 2. What information from the problem do I need?
Select only the information you need to answer the question.
Step 3. Which operation do I need to perform—addition, subtraction,
multiplication, or division?
Choose from one of the four operations above based on your
understanding of the question.
Step 4. What is my solution?
Carry out the operation with the numbers you chose in step 2.
Step 5. Does my answer make sense?
Look back to make sure that you answered the question. Check that
your answer makes sense.
To help you decide which operation to use, keep the following ideas in mind.
You . . .

in order to . . .

add

combine amounts of different sizes

subtract

find the difference between amounts

multiply

combine the same amount multiple times

divide

separate one amount into equal-sized groups

Example 1: To cover a sofa, Sophia needs 12 yards of fabric that costs $14
per yard. How many yards does Sophia need for 3 sofas?
A. 4
B. 36
C. 42
D. 168

ON THE GED® TEST TIP
Many Mathematical Reasoning Test questions include
information that is not needed to answer the specific question.
In multiple-choice questions, wrong answer choices may be
based on mistakenly using this “extra” information, so read
carefully.
The correct answer is B. 36 yards of fabric. The question asked you to find
the total number of yards of fabric Sophia needs for 3 sofas. Note that the
cost of a yard of fabric is not needed to answer the question.
Since you were asked to find the amount of fabric for 3 sofas, you should
multiply 12 yards per sofa × 3 sofas = 36 yards. Here are two common errors
to avoid:
If you had mistakenly divided, you would have gotten the incorrect
answer of 4 yards of fabric for 3 sofas.
If you had used the $14 price per yard and multiplied by either 3 sofas
or 12 yards, you would have been tempted by wrong answers 42 or 168.

However, the cost per yard is not needed.

Practice 4.1
1. Peter wants to repaint his 700-square-foot apartment. He calculates that
he has 3500 square feet of wall space to paint. (He will not paint the floor
or the ceiling.) If each gallon of paint will cover 350 square feet of wall
space, how many gallons will Peter need?
A. 2
B. 5
C. 10
D. 15
2. For a family get-together, Darryl wants to be sure that each child gets 2
party favors. The party favors cost $3 each, and there are 11 children
coming. How many party favors will Darryl need?
A. 9
B. 11
C. 18
D. D. 22
3. Sarah and Kate live 18 miles apart, and they both work at the same office.
If Sarah lives 25 miles from the office and Kate lives 30 miles from the
office, how many miles farther from the office does Kate live than Sarah?
A. 5
B. 7
C. 12
D. D. 15
For question 4, write your answer on the line provided.
4. The Navarro family uses an average of 225 gallons of water per day, 5
gallons of which goes through the family’s water filter. The Navarros’
water filter can process 450 gallons before it needs to be replaced. After

how many days of average water use will the family need to replace their
filter?
Questions 5 and 6 are based on the following information.
Joyce owns a beauty salon, and she has posted the following information in
her salon.
Minutes to
Complete

Service

Price

Manicure

30

$15

Pedicure

30

$25

Manicure &
Pedicure

45

$35

Facial

45

$45

Makeover

60

$60

5. How many minutes will it take Joyce to give 3 pedicures?
A. 30
B. 55
C. 75
D. 90
6. How much more does a customer pay for the makeover than for the
manicure & pedicure combination?
A. $15
B. $20
C. $25
D. $35
For questions 7 and 8, write your answers on the lines provided.
7. Brandon is planning his part of the local community garden. He has
calculated that he can plant 6 seedlings per row, and the garden allots 7

rows to each gardener. What is the maximum number of seedlings
Brandon could plant?
________________________________
8. Sumayyah knits gloves and hats each winter and sells them through a
local shop. If Sumayyah received $189 from the sale of her hats and
gloves this past winter, and she spent $27 on yarn, how much money did
she earn from her knitting?
$ ________________________________
Answers and explanations begin on page 661.

Multi-Step Word Problems
The word problems on the previous two pages involved only one operation to
solve. However, on the GED® Mathematical Reasoning Test and other tests,
you may need to do several math processes to solve a problem. These are
called multi-step problems.
When you are working on multi-step problems, there are two important ideas
to keep in mind. What is the question asking me to find? and Did I answer the
question?
Review this example of a multi-step problem and the problem-solving
process below.
Example 1: To win a prize, Sarah’s daughter has to sell 75 boxes of cookies
in 3 days. If she sold 16 boxes on day 1 and 34 boxes on day 2, how
many boxes would she need to sell on day 3 to win the prize?
(1) 18
(2) 25
(3) 50
Step 1. What is the question asking me to find?

The question asks me to find how many boxes Sarah’s daughter needs
to sell on the third day to make her goal of 75 boxes.
Step 2. What information from the problem do I need?
I know the total number of boxes she needs to sell (75 boxes).
I know how many boxes she sold on day 1 (16 boxes) and day 2 (34
boxes).
Step 3. Do I need to do only one operation, or do I need to do more than one?
I can add to find how many boxes Sarah's daughter has sold so far:
.
However, that doesn’t tell me how many boxes she needs to sell on
day 3. I need one more step.
Step 4. What is my solution?
75 boxes total − 50 boxes sold = 25 boxes for day 3. The correct
answer is (2) 25.
Step 5. Does my answer make sense? Did I answer the question?
By taking the additional step, I answered the question of how many
boxes need to be sold on day 3.
This sample multi-step problem involved only two operations: adding and
subtracting. On the actual test, you may need to do three or more operations
to answer a question, so read and think carefully about each problem.
As you think about the example, note the most common mistake people make
with multi-step problems. Often they stop short of answering the question.
Notice that choice (3) 50 is a partial solution, but it is not the answer to the
question. Using the five-step problem-solving process will help you avoid
that mistake.

Practice 4.2
Questions 1–3 are based on the information below.
Farhana’s produce company distributes to several restaurants. The table
below shows how many cases of different produce each restaurant ordered
from Farhana’s company in July.
Produce Orders in July
Asparagus

Boston
Lettuce

Carrots

Romaine
Lettuce

Tomatoes

Restaurant
A

2

3

1

4

3

Restaurant
B

4

4

2

2

1

Restaurant
C

0

0

3

4

3

Restaurant
D

1

2

2

3

4

Restaurant
E

3

0

3

2

1

1. If Boston lettuce costs $17 per case and romaine lettuce costs $23 per
case, how much did Restaurant D spend on lettuce ordered from Farhana
in July?
A. $85
B. $93
C. $103
D. $143
2. Delivery costs $2 per case for the first 5 cases and $1 per case for each
additional case of produce. What was Restaurant B’s delivery charge in
July?
A. $13

B. $18
C. $20
D. $26
3. If asparagus costs $22 per case and tomatoes cost $15 per case, which of
the following restaurants spent the most on asparagus and tomatoes
combined?
A. Restaurant A
B. Restaurant B
C. Restaurant C
D. Restaurant D
4. At a certain store, loose-leaf paper comes only in packages of 400 sheets.
If a student buys enough paper at this store to fill 3 binders with 150
sheets of paper each, how many sheets will be left over?
A. 17
B. 50
C. 350
D. 450
5. Three friends are baking cupcakes for a bake sale. Each batch of 24
cupcakes requires 2 cups of flour. The friends have a single 5-pound bag
of flour that contains 19 cups of flour. How many whole batches of
cupcakes can they bake?
A. 9
B. 38
C. 216
D. 228
6. A certain health insurance plan costs $3000 per year for a family of six. If
each member of the family has $750 in medical expenses in a year, and
the plan pays 100 percent of those expenses, how much will the family
save by purchasing the plan?
A. $1500

B. $2000
C. $2500
D. $3000
Answers and explanations begin on page 661.

Lesson 5: Distance and Cost
Key Ideas
The following all indicate multiplication:
n × r nr n(r) n.r
The following indicate division:

A formula can be rewritten to solve for each of its variables.

Distance
On the Mathematical Reasoning Test, you’ll see questions that will require
you to apply formulas. When a relationship is constant, use a formula to set
up the information about how the different parts relate to each other. One of

the most commonly tested formulas deals with distance, rate, and time.
Distance is a product of the rate at which something travels and the amount
of travel time:

Notice that letters, or variables, can be used to represent the different parts of
a formula. A formula allows you to substitute known values for certain
variables and solve for the unknown variable.
Example 1: How many miles can you travel if you drive at an average speed
of 55 miles per hour for 3 hours?
1. You know the rate (55 miles per hour) and the time (3 hours).
Substitute the values in the distance formula.
distance= 55×3
2. Multiply to find the distance.

GED® TEST TIP
Substitute all of the values for variables back into a formula to
check your answer.

Cost
Another helpful formula is the cost formula. It expresses the relationship
between cost, the number of units, and rate (price per unit). NOTE: The
word per means for every one unit. The cost formula can be written as
follows:

Example 2: At a bakery, a package of frosted cookies is priced at $3 per
package. If a teacher treats her class by buying 4 packages, how
much would the cookies cost before tax?
1. You know the number of units (4 packages) and the price per unit ($3
per package). Substitute the values in the cost formula.
C = nr

2. Multiply to find the total cost.

If you know any two of the three variables in a formula, you can solve for the
third variable.
Example 3: Max bought a set of 4 floor mats for $44. How much was the
price per floor mat?
1. You know the total cost ($44) and the number of units (4 floor mats).
Rewrite the formula to solve for the price per unit (r).

2. Substitute the known values in the cost formula. Divide to find the
price per unit.

Practice 5
A. Each problem below includes two of the three variables from either
the distance formula or the cost formula. Write the missing variable
you need to solve for. Then decide which of the following formula
variations you would use in each situation. The first one is done for
you.

1. Given: distance and time
Solve for: rate

Formula:

2. Given: rate and time
Solve for: ______________
Formula: ______________
3. Given: distance and rate
Solve for: ______________

Formula: ______________
4. Given: cost and number of units
Solve for: ______________
Formula: ______________
5. Given: number of units and price per unit
Solve for: ______________
Formula: ______________
6. Given: cost and price per unit
Solve for: ______________
Formula: ______________
B. Use the formulas provided in part A above to help you set up the
problems. Solve for the unknown variable.
7. Find the total cost of 4 flats of plants at $12 each.
8. Find the total cost of 12 boxes of cookies if each box costs $3.
9. If 4 tires cost $320, how much does a single tire cost?
10. How many tickets would you get for $25 if raffle tickets cost $5
apiece?
11. If you paid $20 for 10 bus transfer tickets, how much did you pay per
ticket?
12. Find the distance traveled by a car averaging 60 miles per hour for 3
hours.
13. Find the distance traveled by a train averaging 50 miles per hour for 4
hours.
14. How long does it take for a bus to travel 25 miles at an average rate of
25 miles per hour?
15. If a train travels 270 miles in 3 hours, what is the train’s average
speed?
16. How long does it take to complete a delivery route of 75 miles at a rate

of 25 miles per hour?
C. Choose the one best answer to each question.
17. A company sold a total of $640 in gift boxes. If the gift boxes cost $20
apiece, how many gift boxes did the company sell?
A. 32
B. 320
C. 660
D. 1280
18. A truck driver traveled 275 miles in 5 hours. What was his average
speed in miles per hour?
A. 1375
B. 280
C. 270
D. 55
Answers and explanations begin on page 661.

Number Sense and Problem Solving
Practice Questions
Directions: You MAY use your calculator.
1. A beverage container holds 12 servings. If the serving size is 8 ounces,
how many ounces does the container hold in all?
A. 20
B. 32
C. 48
D. 96
2. Sales at 3 concession stands are $839, $527, and $726. What is the

total amount in sales?
A. $1581
B. $2092
C. $2178
D. $2517
3. If you want to cut 24 two-foot braces, how many boards of the length
shown below would you need?

A. 4
B. 6
C. 12
D. 24
4. Using your calculator, find the value of

.

A. 11
B. 21
C. 221
D. 441
5. Angelo bought a used car with 39,451 miles on it. If the car now has
70,040 miles on it, how many miles has Angelo driven the car?
A. 30,589
B. 39,459
C. 70,040
D. 109,491
6. Use your calculator to solve this problem. If Emory paid 20 percent of
$3280 as a down payment, how much was the down payment?

A. $164
B. $328
C. $656
D. $6560
7. Inventory shows that a warehouse has 45 printers in stock. If each
printer is valued at $125, what is the total value of the printer
inventory?
A. $5625
B. $170
C. $80
D. $45
8. Lydia can drive 180 miles in 3 hours. On Tuesday, she drove for 7
hours at that rate. How many miles did she drive on Tuesday?
A. 60
B. 420
C. 600
D. 1260
9. Janelle wants to drive from Danville to Brownsville. If she averages 60
miles per hour, how many hours will it take her to drive the distance?

A. 6
B. 8
C. 60
D. 540
10. A company sold a total of $1440 in gift bears for Valentine’s Day. If
the gift bears cost $15 apiece, how many gift bears did it sell?
A. 15

B. 96
C. 144
D. 1440
11. In addition to interest charges, Richard’s credit card company charges a
$25 late fee for payments made after the payment due date. If he was
charged a late fee for 8 monthly bills, how much could he have saved
by paying the bills on time?
A. $200
B. $80
C. $33
D. $25
12. A waiter has seven $5 bills and eighteen $1 bills from tips. In all, how
much does he have in tips?
A. $18
B. $25
C. $35
D. $53
13. April has taken her car in for the recommended oil and filter change
every 3,500 miles. If April bought her car brand-new, and the odometer
now shows just over 17,500 miles, how many oil changes has her car
received?
A. 5
B. 14
C. 123
D. 1236
14. A clinic treated 536 children over a 4-month period. At this rate, how
many children did the clinic treat in 1 month?
A. 134
B. 536
C. 540

D. 2144
15. Attendance at a local play was 438 Friday night, 820 Saturday night,
and 636 Sunday afternoon. How many more people attended the play
on Sunday than on Friday?
Write your answer on the line below.
________________________
16. Raquel has 4 payments left on her car. If each payment is $268, how
much does she still owe on her car?
Write your answer on the line below.
________________________
17. In what order should items weighing 51 pounds, 40 pounds, 48 pounds,
and 44 pounds be stacked if you want them in order from heaviest to
lightest?
A. 51, 44, 40, 48
B. 40, 44, 48, 51
C. 51, 48, 44, 40
D. 51, 40, 44, 48
18. Which of the following correctly shows 2,354,769 rounded to the
nearest ten thousand?
A. 2,400,000
B. 2,355,000
C. 2,350,000
D. 2,000,000
19. What is the total weight, in pounds, of the packages below?

A. 83
B. 65
C. 60
D. 42
20. Jason paid a $14 dinner bill with a $20 bill. How much change should
he receive?
A. $6
B. $7
C. $14
D. $34
21. Maria spent 8 minutes installing a new showerhead, 33 minutes
rodding out a drain, and 18 minutes fixing a leaking faucet. About how
many minutes did it take Maria to complete all three tasks?
A. 90
B. 60
C. 30
D. 20
22. Carla drove 248 miles in 4 hours. What was her average rate of speed,
in miles per hour?
Write your answer on the line below.
________________________

23. A bulk bag of nuts contains 144 ounces of nuts. If the nuts are
packaged in smaller 8-ounce bags, how many bags will there be?
A. 8
B. 12
C. 18
D. 136
24. If you drove 299 miles on 9 gallons of gasoline, about how many miles
per gallon did the car get?
A. 10
B. 30
C. 270
D. 300
25. A shipment of 33 crates like the one shown below is delivered.
Approximately how many pounds did workers unload?

A. 40
B. 120
C. 1200
D. 2000
26. Four friends bought a birthday cake for $21 and balloons for $15. If
they divided the cost equally, how much did each friend pay toward the
birthday party?
A. $4
B. $5
C. $9
D. $36

27. David paid $20 toward a dinner bill of $128. If the remainder of the bill
is divided equally among the remaining 9 people in the group, how
much should each person other than David pay?
A. $12
B. $18
C. $20
D. $108
28. A driver traveled 4 hours at an average rate of 65 miles per hour. How
many miles did the person drive?
A. 61
B. 69
C. 240
D. 260
29. Using the following information, how much would a large pizza with 3
toppings cost?

Large 1-Topping Pizza for $14
$2 for Each Additional Topping

A. $20
B. $18
C. $16
D. $14
30. Bagels are 2 for $1. What is the maximum number of bagels you could
buy for $7?
A. 7
B. 10
C. 14

D. 15
31. How many months would it take to save $1800 at $75 per month?
Write your answer on the line below.
________________________
32. How many 45-page documents would a binder hold if its maximum
capacity is 630 sheets of paper?
Write your answer on the line below.
________________________
Answers and explanations begin on page 662.

CHAPTER 2

Decimals and Fractions
Lesson 1: Decimal Basics
Key Ideas
The decimal point separates the whole number from the decimal part.
To round decimals, use the same rules as with rounding whole numbers.
Adding zeros to the right of the last digit after the decimal does not
change the number’s value.

The Decimal System
Decimals are numbers that use place value to show amounts less than 1. You
already use decimals when working with money. For example, in the amount
$10.25, you know that the digits to the right of the decimal point represent
cents, or hundredths of a dollar.
The first four decimal place values are labeled on the chart below.

The number 2.375 is shown on the chart. Read and in place of the decimal
point. After reading the decimal part, say the place value of the last decimal
digit. This number would be read “two and three hundred seventy-five
thousandths.”

Rounding
Round decimals the same way you round whole numbers.
Example 1: A calculator display reads 3.62835. Round to the hundredths
place.

GED® TEST TIP
The Mathematical Reasoning Test may show a zero written
before the decimal point. The zero does not change the value of
the number. Example: 0.75 = .75
1. Look at the digit to the right of the hundredths place.

2. If the digit to the right is 5 or greater, round up. If the digit is less than
5, don’t change the number. Then drop all digits to the right of the
place you are rounding to.

Since 8 is greater than 5, round up. 3.62835 rounds to 3.63.

Comparing and Ordering
Comparing decimals is similar to comparing whole numbers.
Example 2: Matt ran the 400-meter race in 45.8 seconds. Alonzo ran the same
race in 45.66 seconds. Which runner had the faster time?
1. Line up the decimal points. Add a zero at the end of 45.8 so that both
times have the same number of digits after the decimal.
45.80
45.66
2. Compare the decimal parts of the numbers as though they were whole
numbers. Alonzo’s time was faster.
80 is greater than 66, so 45.8 is greater than 45.66.
When you compare more than two numbers, it is helpful to compare one
place-value column at a time, working from left to right.
Example 3: Arrange the numbers 0.85, 1.8, 0.8, and 0.819 in order from
greatest to least.
1. Write the numbers in a column, lining up the decimal points. Add zeros
so that the numbers have the same number of decimal places.
0.850
1.800
0.800
0.819
2. Compare the digits, working from left to right. Only 1.8 has a whole
number part, so it is greatest. The remaining numbers each have 8 in
the tenths column. Looking at the hundredths column, 0.85 is next,
followed by 0.819. The least number is 0.8.

In order: 1.8 0.85
0.819
0.8

Practice 1
A. Round these numbers as directed.
1. Round 3.75 to the tenths place.
2. Round 5.908 to the ones place.
3. A calculator display reads 0.4285714. Round to the nearest
hundredth.
4. Round 0.66667 to the nearest thousandth.
5. Round 8.125 to the nearest tenth.
6. A calculator display reads 2.7142857. Round to the nearest
thousandth.
B. In each of the following pairs, which number is greater?
7. 0.45 or 0.449
8. 0.008 or 0.08
9. 4.68 or 4.086
10. 0.75 or 1.85
11. 1.0275 or 1.029
12. 0.14 or 0.104
C. Write these numbers in order from least to greatest.
13. 5.6 5.08 5.8 5.802
14. 0.1136 0.12 0.2 0.115
15. 14.005 4.52 4.8 4.667
16. 0.8023 0.8 0.803 0.823
D. Choose the one best answer to each question.
17. In a circuit board assembly, the weights of three parts are 0.572 grams,
0.0785 grams, and 0.6 grams. Which of the following lists the weights

in order from greatest to least?
A. 0.0785 g, 0.572 g, 0.6 g
B. 0.6 g, 0.0785 g, 0.572 g
C. 0.6 g, 0.572 g, 0.0785 g
D. 0.572 g, 0.6 g, 0.0785 g
18. Which of the following correctly shows 1.3815 rounded to the nearest
hundredth?
A. 1.4
B. 1.382
C. 1.381
D. 1.38
Answers and explanations begin on page 662.

Lesson 2: Decimal Operations
Key Ideas
Always add and subtract like place-value columns.
Always line up the decimal points when you write a problem in
columns.
When adding or subtracting, place the decimal point in the answer
directly below the decimal point in the problem.

Addition and Subtraction
Adding decimals is much like adding whole numbers. The trick is to make
sure you have lined up the place-value columns correctly. You can do this by
writing the numbers in a column and carefully lining up the decimal points.
Example 1: Add

.

1. Write the numbers in a column, lining up the decimal points.

2. You may add placeholder zeros so that the decimals have the same
number of decimal places.
3. Add. Start on the right and add each column. Regroup, or carry, as you
would with whole numbers.

4. Place the decimal point in the answer directly below the decimal points
in the problem.
To find the difference between decimals, write the numbers in a column with
the greater number on top. Make sure the decimal points are in a line.
Example 2: Find the difference between 14.512 and 8.7.

1. Write the numbers in a column, lining up the decimal points. Add
placeholder zeros so that the numbers have the same number of
decimal places.

2. Subtract. Regroup, or borrow, as needed. Place the decimal point in the
answer directly in line with the decimal points in the problem.

GED® TEST TIP
To make sure that your answer makes sense, mentally round
the numbers to the nearest whole number and then add or
subtract. The result should be close to your answer.
The greater number may have fewer or no decimal places. In the next
example, a decimal is subtracted from a whole number.

Example 3: What does 9 minus 3.604 equal?
1. Line up the place-value columns. Put a decimal point after the whole
number 9 and add placeholder zeros.

2. Subtract, regrouping as needed. Place the decimal point in the answer.

Practice 2.1
A. Solve. You MAY NOT use a calculator.

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
B. Choose the one best answer to each question.
25. James ran 3 miles. His times for the individual miles were 7.2 minutes,
6.8 minutes, and 8.25 minutes. How long did it take him, in minutes,
to run the 3-mile distance?
A. 22.25
B. 22.7
C. 23.35
D. 96.5

26. Claudia earns overtime pay when she works more than 40 hours in one
week. How many hours of overtime pay did she work for the week of
March 4?
Work Record for March 4–10
March 4

8.5

March 5

Off

March 6

9.25

March 7

8.75

March 8

10

March 9

Off

March 10

7.75

A. 44.25
B. 40.0
C. 4.25
D. 2.25
27. A plumber cut two lengths of pipe measuring 2.8 and 1.4 meters from
a 6-meter length.

Assuming there was no waste when the cuts were made, what is the
length in meters of the remaining piece?
A. 1.8
B. 3.2
C. 4.2
D. 7.4
28. Mona purchased the following art supplies: a storage box for $16.98, a

set of art markers for $31.78, and a pad of paper for $6.50. What was
the cost of the three items?
A. $48.76
B. $53.26
C. $55.26
D. $61.76
Answers and explanations begin on page 662.

Multiplication and Division
The rules you used to multiply whole numbers can be used to multiply
decimals. You don’t have to line up the decimal points. You will wait until
you are finished multiplying before you place the decimal point in the
answer. The number of decimal places in the answer equals the total number
of decimal places in the numbers you are multiplying.
Example 4: Find the product of 2.6 and 0.45.
1. Set up the problem as though you were multiplying the whole numbers
26 and 45.

2. Ignore the decimal points while you multiply.
3. Now count the decimal places in the numbers you multiplied. The
number 2.6 has one decimal place, and 0.45 has two decimal places,
for a total of three.

4. Starting from the right, count three places to the left and insert the
decimal point. Thus, the answer is 1.17.
When you divide decimals, you must figure out where the decimal point will
go in the answer before you divide.
Example 5: Divide 14.4 by 6.
1. Set up the problem. Since the divisor (the number you are dividing by)
is a whole number, place the decimal point in the answer directly above
the decimal point in the dividend (the number you are dividing).
2. Divide. Use the rules you learned for dividing whole numbers. The
answer is 2.4.

If the divisor is a decimal, you must move the decimal points in both the
divisor and the dividend before you divide.
Example 6: Divide 4.9 by 0.35.

1. Set up the problem. There are two decimal places in the divisor. Move
the decimal point in both the divisor and the dividend two places to the
right. Note that you need to add a zero in the dividend in order to move
the decimal two places.

2. Place the decimal point in the quotient directly above the decimal point
in the dividend.
3. Divide. The correct answer is 14.
NOTE: You may not need to finish dividing in order to choose the correct
answer. You may be able to eliminate all but one of the answer choices after
only one or two division steps.

Practice 2.2
A. Solve. You MAY NOT use a calculator.

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
B. Choose the one best answer to each question.
22. One container of floor cleaner holds 3.79 liters. If Zachary bought 4
containers, how many liters of cleaner did he buy?
A. 0.9475
B. 7.79
C. 12.83
D. 15.16
23. Ribbon costs $0.45 per foot. A sewing project calls for 20.5 feet of
ribbon. To the nearest cent, what will be the cost of the ribbon for
the project?

A. $0.92
B. $9.23
C. $9.90
D. $45.56
24. Armando drove 278.7 miles over a 3-day period. On average, how
many miles did he drive each day?
A. 9.3
B. 90.3
C. 92.9
D. 836.1
Questions 25 and 26 are based on the following information.
Cereal

Net Weight

Servings per Box

Toasted Oats

22.8 oz

19

Crisp Rice

16.9 oz

13

Honey Mix

12.5 oz

10

25. A box of Toasted Oats cereal is priced at $4.94. What is the cost per
serving? (Hint: Divide the price by the number of servings.)
A. $0.49
B. $0.29
C. $0.26
D. $0.22
26. Lee bought 4 boxes of Honey Mix cereal. How many ounces of cereal did
she buy?
A. 31.25
B. 50.0
C. 67.6
D. 91.2
Answers and explanations begin on page 662.

Lesson 3: Fraction Basics
Key Ideas
The bottom number of a fraction tells how many parts the group or
object has.
The top number tells how many parts you are working with.
When the top number is greater than the bottom number, the fraction is
greater than 1.
A fraction uses two numbers to represent part of a whole. The bottom
number, called the denominator, tells how many equal parts are in the whole
group or item. The top number, called the numerator, tells how many parts
you are working with.
There are 4 equal parts in this rectangle. Since 3 are shaded, we say that
of the rectangle is shaded.

In a proper fraction, the numerator is less than the denominator. A proper
fraction represents a quantity less than 1. An improper fraction is equal to
or greater than 1.

There are 6 equal parts in the figure, and 6 are

shaded; therefore,

of the figure is shaded.

In this grouping, each figure is divided into 2 equal parts. A total of 3 parts
are shaded, so

are shaded.

A mixed number is another way to show an amount greater than 1. It
consists of a whole number and a proper fraction. Another name for the
shaded portion in the last figure is

equals

. The improper fraction

.

You can also change an improper fraction to a whole or mixed number.
Example 1: Change

to a mixed number.

GED® TEST TIP
If you have trouble visualizing the fractions in a problem, draw
a quick sketch of the information presented in the problem
similar to the ones on this page.
1. Divide the numerator (16) by the denominator (5). Since 16 is not
evenly divisible by 5, there is a remainder of 1.

2. The answer becomes the whole number, and the remainder becomes
the numerator of the proper fraction. The denominator is the same as
the original fraction.

You can also change a mixed number to an improper fraction.
Example 2: Change

to an improper fraction.

1. Multiply the whole number (7) by the denominator of the fraction (3),
and add the numerator (2).

2. Write the sum over the denominator of the original fraction.

To perform operations with fractions, you need to be able to write equal
fractions in higher or lower terms. The terms are the numerator and the
denominator. A fraction is reduced to lowest terms when the two terms do
not have any common factor except 1.
To raise a fraction, multiply both terms by the same number:
.

To reduce a fraction, divide both terms by the same number:

.

Practice 3
A. Write a proper fraction for the shaded portion of each figure.
1.

2.

3.
B. Write an improper fraction and a mixed number for the shaded
portion of each figure.
4.

5.

6.
C. Write improper fractions as mixed numbers and mixed numbers as
improper fractions.
7.

8.
9.
10.

11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
D. Write an equal fraction with the given denominator.
17.
18.
19.
20.

21.
(Hint for question 17:

)

E. Reduce each fraction to lowest terms.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
F. Choose the one best answer to each question.
27. Eighteen out of every 24 people surveyed say they went to at least one
movie in December. What fraction of the people surveyed went to at
least one movie in December?

A.

B.

C.

D.

28. Which of the following fractions equals

?

A.

B.

C.

D.

Answers and explanations begin on page 663.

Lesson 4: Fraction Operations

Key Ideas
You can add or subtract fractions, but they must have the same
denominator.
If denominators are not the same, find a common denominator and
raise one or both fractions.
Always reduce answers to lowest terms and change improper
fractions to mixed numbers.

Addition and Subtraction
You can add or subtract like fractions. Like fractions have a common
denominator. In other words, their denominators are the same.
Example 1: Add

.

1. Since the denominators are the same, add the numerators.

2. Reduce the answer to lowest terms.

Example 2: Subtract

from

.

Subtract the numerators. The answer is already in lowest terms.

If the denominators are not the same, raise one or both fractions to higher
terms so that they become like fractions.

GED® TEST TIP
If your solution to a fraction problem is not one of the given
answer choices, make sure that you reduced your answer to
lowest terms. On the Mathematical Reasoning Test, answer
choices are always written in lowest terms.
Example 3: Add

.

1. One way to find a common denominator is to think of the multiples
of both denominators. The lowest is 12.

2. Raise each fraction to higher terms with a denominator of 12.

3. Add the like fractions. Rewrite the sum as a mixed number.

Use the same process to add or subtract mixed numbers. Example 4 shows
how to regroup when subtracting mixed numbers.
Example 4: Subtract

.

1. Raise the second fraction so that it also has a denominator of 16.

2. Set up the problem. To subtract the fractions, you need to regroup 1
from the whole number column and add it to the top fraction.

3. Subtract the fractions and then the whole numbers.

Practice 4.1
A. Solve. Reduce answers to lowest terms. Simplify improper
fractions as mixed numbers.

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.

25.
B. Choose the one best answer to each question.
26. To make the top of a dining room table, Craig glues a piece of
oak that is

inch thick to a piece of pine that is

inch

thick. What is the total thickness, in inches, of the tabletop?

A.

B.

C.

D.

27. Carol will use the two bolts shown below to assemble a book
cart. How much longer, in inches, is bolt A than bolt B?

A.

B.

C.

D.

28. At a fabric store, Melissa sold

yards of cloth to a

customer. If the material was cut from a bolt of fabric containing
yards, how many yards are left on the bolt?

A.
B.
C.
D.

29. A batch of salad dressing requires
of vinegar, and

cups of olive oil,

cup

cup of water. How many cups of salad

dressing will this recipe produce?

A.

B.

C.

D.

Answers and explanations begin on page 663.

Multiplication and Division
It isn’t necessary to find a common denominator to multiply and divide
fractions. To multiply fractions, simply multiply the numerators and then
the denominators. Reduce the answer, if necessary.

Example 5: What is the product of

and

?

Multiply the numerators together and then the denominators. The answer
is in lowest terms.

Before multiplying a mixed number, change it to an improper fraction.

Example 6: What is

1. Change

of

?

to an improper fraction.

2. Multiply the numerators and the denominators.

3. Change to a mixed number and reduce to lowest terms.

You can use a shortcut called canceling to reduce the fractions as you
work the problem. To cancel, divide both a numerator and a denominator
by the same number. The numerator and the denominator can be in
different fractions.

Example 7: Multiply

by

.

1. Change to improper fractions.

2. Set up the multiplication problem. Both 6 (a numerator) and 2 (a
denominator) are evenly divisible by 2. Divide them by 2. Then
multiply using the new numerator and denominator. Finally, change
the improper fraction to a mixed number.

The slash marks show that the numbers have been divided.
You will need two additional steps to divide fractions. Before dividing,
invert the divisor (the fraction you are dividing by). To invert the fraction,
switch the numerator and the denominator. Finally, change the division
symbol to a multiplication symbol and multiply.
Example 8: Jim has an 8-pound bag of nuts. He wants to fill smaller
pound bags using the nuts. How many small bags can he make?

-

1. Divide 8 by

. Set up the division problem. Always write whole

or mixed numbers as improper fractions.

2. Invert the fraction you are dividing by. Then change the operation
sign to multiplication. Multiply, following the rules for multiplying
fractions. Jim can make 16 small bags.

NOTE: When you multiply by a fraction less than 1, the answer is smaller
than the number you started with because you are finding a “part of.”
When you divide by a fraction less than 1, the answer is greater than the
number.

Practice 4.2
A. Solve. Reduce answers to lowest terms. Simplify improper
fractions as mixed numbers.
1.
2.
3.
4.

5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
B. Choose the one best answer to each question.

19. A city is considering raising taxes to build a football stadium. A
survey of registered voters yielded the following results:
Position

Fraction of Those Surveyed

Against Tax Hike
For Tax Hike
Undecided

If 400 people were surveyed, how many support the tax hike?
A. 48
B. 75
C. 150
D. 175
20. A tailor has 20 yards of shirt fabric. How many shirts can she
complete if each shirt requires

yards of fabric?

A. 6
B. 7
C. 8
D. 10

21. An insurance agent estimates that it takes

hour to process a

customer’s claim. If the agent spends 22 hours per week processing

claims, about how many claims does he process in a week?
A.
B. 33
C. 44
D. 66
22. A fluorescent lighting panel is

inches wide. If three of

the panels are installed as shown below, what will be the width in
inches of the combined panels?

A.
B.
C.
D.
Answers and explanations begin on page 663.

Lesson 5: Fraction and Decimal
Equivalencies
Key Ideas

To change a fraction to a decimal, divide the numerator by the
denominator.
To change a decimal to a fraction, write the number without the
decimal point over the place value of the last decimal digit. Reduce.
Avoid time-consuming calculations by using fraction-decimal
equivalents.
Fractions and decimals are two ways to show part of a whole. You can
change fractions to decimals by dividing.
Example 1: Change

The fraction

means

to a decimal.

. Use a calculator to divide.

You can also change a decimal to a fraction.
Example 2: Change 0.35 to a fraction.
Write the decimal number over the place value name of the last decimal
digit on the right. The last digit, 5, is in the hundredths column. Reduce to
lowest terms.

You will find it useful to memorize the most common fraction and
decimal equivalents. These equivalents will also help you solve percent problems.

Decimal

Fraction

Decimal Fraction

Decimal Fraction

0.1

0.375

0.7

0.125

0.4

0.75

0.2

0.5

0.8

0.25

0.6

0.875

0.3

0.625

0.9

GED® TEST TIP
Look at the answer choices before you begin working a
multiple-choice problem. Knowing whether you need an
answer in fraction or decimal form may affect how you
approach the problem.
The decimal equivalents for

and

are marked with a bar. The bar

shows that the decimal repeats indefinitely.
You can use fraction and decimal equivalents to save time when solving
math problems.
Example 3: Each dose of cough medicine contains 0.25 ounce of
medication. How many ounces of medication are in 48 doses?

To solve the problem, you need to multiply 48 by 0.25, a time-consuming
calculation. However, since

you can find

of 48 to solve

the problem. The answer is 12 ounces.

Knowing fraction-decimal equivalents can also help you interpret
remainders when using a calculator.
Example 4: Ray inspects machine assemblies. He must inspect 12
assemblies during his 40-hour workweek. On average, how many hours
can he spend on each inspection?
Using a calculator, divide 40 by 12: 40
the display reads 3.333333333.
Since you know that

, the answer is

. The right side of

hours.

Practice 5
Solve. When possible, use fraction and decimal equivalents to make
the work easier. You MAY use a calculator on questions 5 and 6.
1. During a 25 percent-off sale, store clerks find the amount of the
discounts by multiplying the regular price by 0.25. What is the
discount on an item with a regular price of $80?
A. $32.00
B. $20.00
C. $16.40
D. $2.00

2. At Linton Products,

of the workers are in the company’s ride-

share program. If there are 480 workers, which of the following
expressions could be used to find the number in the ride-share
program?

3. Sharon is using a calculator to find out how many hours she has
spent on a certain job. She divides, and her display reads:

Assuming her calculations are correct, how many hours did she
spend on the job?

A.

B.

C.
D. 46
4. A gourmet candy company charges the following prices per pound.
Jelly Beans

$9.60

Peanut Brittle

$12.00

Almond Toffee

$28.50

How much would a customer pay for 1.5 pounds of peanut brittle?
A. $6.00
B. $14.40
C. $18.00
D. $42.75
5. At 1 p.m., the amount of rain in a rain gauge is 1.125 inches. At 3
p.m., the gauge holds 1.875 inches. What fraction of an inch of rain
fell between 1 p.m. and 3 p.m.?
A.
B.

C.

D.

6. A steel rod, 3 meters in length, is cut into 8 equal pieces. What is
the length, in meters, of each piece?
A. 0.125
B. 0.333
C. 0.375
D. 2.333
Answers and explanations begin on page 663.

Lesson 6: Decimals and Fractions on the
Number Line
Key Ideas
A number line is a picture that helps you compare the sizes of
numbers. Numbers on the left are smaller than numbers on the right.
Number lines can also be used to represent and compare decimals.
Fractions and mixed fractions can also be represented on a number
line.
On the GED® Mathematical Reasoning Test you may need to recognize
or locate fractions, mixed fractions, or decimals on a number line. A
number line represents numbers in order from least to greatest. As you
move to the left along a number line, numbers decrease in value. As you
move to the right, numbers increase in value.

The arrows on the ends indicate that numbers continue forever in both
directions. If you imagine zooming in on a portion of that number line, it
might look like this:

Thus, a number line can include decimals and whole numbers. For
example, the point represents 0.75, which is greater than 0.5 and less than
1.
A number line can also represent fractions and mixed fractions in
increasing order:

Use this question to practice working with number lines:

GED® TEST TIP
Questions on the Mathematical Reasoning Test may ask you
to recognize a fraction or a decimal on a number line, or
they may ask you to place a dot on a line to represent a
fraction or decimal value.
Example 1: John works five shifts per week. His boss asks him to spend
exactly half of his time this week working on a specific proj-ect.
How many work shifts will John devote to that project? Circle the
answer on the number line below.

If you circled

that John will spend

, you are correct. Multiply 5 by

to determine

shifts on the project.

Practice 6
A. Choose the one best answer to each question.
1. What is the value of the point on the number line below?

A. 0
B.

C.

D.
2. What is the value of the point on the number line below?

A. 2
B. 2.5
C. 2.7
D. 2.8
3. In the number line below, what is the value of A minus B?

A. 1
B.

C. 2
D.
4. Angela baked 24 cookies and gave 16 of them to her neighbor.
On the number line below, circle the fraction of Angela’s
cookies that she gave to her neighbor.

B. Write the decimal values of the points on the number lines.
For each of the number lines below, fill in the value of the point using
decimals.
5.

6.

C. Write the fraction values of the points on the number lines.
For each of the number lines below, fill in the value of the point using
mixed fractions.
7.

8.

Answers and explanations begin on page 663.

Lesson 7: Decimal and Fraction
Calculator Skills
Several important calculator keys are used to work with decimals and
fractions.

Key Ideas
Fraction and decimal operations are entered in the same order as
whole-number operations.
On the TI-30XS MultiViewTM calculator, use the decimal point key
(.) for decimals and the fraction key,

, for fractions.

To work with mixed fractions, use the 2nd function,
is in green over the fraction key.

, which

GED® TEST TIP
A fraction answer may appear in the form of an improper
fraction. In order to change to an equivalent mixed number,
use the green 2nd function over this key:

Calculator decimal operations are performed in the same way that you
use operations with whole numbers. You need to use the decimal point
key

under the 2 in the white numeric keypad. Practice with these

examples:

To solve this problem
...

Press these keys . . .

The right-hand side
of the display reads .
..

3.89+2.5

3.89

2.5

6.39

5.2 − 0.78

5.2

0.78

4.42

0.9 × 15

0.9

15

13.5

1.7÷2

1.7

2

0.85

You will use several calculator functions to work with fractions and
mixed fraction operations. First practice entering fractions and
converting to decimals.

Example 1: Reduce

to lowest terms and then convert to a decimal.

Now practice operations with mixed fractions using the 2nd function key.

Example 2: A plastic pipe is to be cut into pieces measuring

feet. The original pipe was
can be cut from the pipe?

feet long. How many pieces

Practice 7
A. Solve the following problems using your calculator.
1.
2.
3.
4.

5. Linda earns $95 per day. If she works

of a day, how much

will she earn?
6. Aaron bought a refrigerator for $956.88. The price includes tax and
interest charges. If he makes 12 equal monthly payments, how
much will he pay each month?

7. An insurance agent estimates the annual cost of insurance on a
home by multiplying the sale price of the home by 0.0125. What
will be the yearly cost of insurance on a home priced at $118,000?
8. In a recipe, the total liquid added to a mixture is
water and

cups of

cups of chicken broth. How many cups of liquid

are used in the recipe?
9. A quilt costs $84.99 and weighs 5.56 pounds. The shipping charge
is $1.20 per pound. To the nearest cent, what would be the shipping
charge on the quilt?
A. $5.56
B. $6.67
C. $8.26
D. $10.20
10. A state park contains 64 acres. A wildlife preserve makes up
of the park. How many acres are in the preserve?
A. 8
B. 21
C. 24
D. 27
Answers and explanations begin on page 664.

Decimals and Fractions Practice
Questions
Directions: You MAY use your calculator.

1. A wooden flooring strip is

inches long. If you cut off

inches from one end, what will be the new length of the strip in
inches?
A.
B.
C.
D.
2. A box of cereal costs $4.69. The package label says that the box
contains 19 servings. What is the cost of 1 serving to the nearest
cent?
A. $0.02
B. $0.25
C. $0.47
D. $2.46
3. How much would a computer system cost if it is priced as shown
below?

Pay $200 down and make 12 monthly payments of only
$98.85.

A. $3586.20
B. $2400.00
C. $1386.20
D. $1186.20
4. Unleaded gasoline sells for $2.869 per gallon. How much would
gallons cost? Round your answer to the nearest cent.
A. $13.40
B. $28.69
C. $30.12
D. $301.20
5. Three packages weigh

pounds,

pounds, and

pounds. What is the average weight, in pounds, of the packages?
(Hint: Add the weights, then divide by the number of packages.)
A. 2.14
B. 2.85
C. 4.75
D. 8.55
6. Gina is paid $8 an hour. If she earned $258 in 1 week, how many
hours did she work?
A.
B.
C.

D.

7. A developer plans to build homes on
that

acres. She estimates

acres will be used for roads. The remaining land will be

divided into

-acre lots. How many lots can the subdivision

include?
A. 7
B. 57
C. 81
D. 107
8. A school buys 1000 white-board markers. Below is the price per
marker for two brands. How much did the school save by buying
Brand A instead of Brand B?
Brand A: $0.27 each
Brand B: $0.36 each
A. $0.09
B. $0.90
C. $9.00
D. $90.00
Questions 9 and 10 refer to the following information.
Madison Small Animal Clinic Scheduling Guidelines
New-Patient Appointment
Immunizations

Routine Physical
Dental Scaling
Sick Animal Visit
Serious-Injury Visit (includes Xrays)
9. Ray is a veterinarian at the small-animal clinic. He has four
appointments scheduled for Monday morning: two new-patient
appointments, a serious-injury visit, and a dental scaling. In hours,
how much time should these appointments take?

A.

B.

C.
D. 4

10. Jennifer works

hours each morning at the clinic. How many

routine physicals could she complete in one morning?
A. 4

B. 9
C. 10
D. 11
11. A minor-league baseball stadium has 6000 seats. On Beach Towel
Night, the stadium sold 5500 of its available seats. What fraction of
the seats were sold?

A.

B.

C.

D.

12. The City Center parking garage charges $3.50 for the first hour and

$1.25 for each additional

park at the garage for

hour. How much would it cost to

hours?

A. $4.75
B. $6.25
C. $7.25
D. $9.75
13. Susan scheduled 84 appointments for patients at a hospital outreach
clinic. Only 56 patients kept their appointments. What fraction of the
scheduled appointments were kept?
Write your answer on the line below.
________________________
14. This portion of a gas bill compares a household’s natural gas usage for
December of this year and last year.
Gas Bill Comparison Average Daily Usage
This Year
Dec

3.13 therms

Last Year
Dec

3.97 therms

How many more therms of natural gas did the household use in
December of last year than in December of this year? Express your
answer as a decimal.
Write your answer on the line below.

________________________
15. Jim and Carl have until 1 p.m. to load 250 boxes. By 12:30 p.m., 175
of the boxes are loaded. What fraction of the boxes has NOT been
loaded?

A.

B.

C.

D.

16. On the number line below, what is the value of A minus B?

A.

B.

C.

D.

17. Scott is driving about 380 miles from Los Angeles to San Francisco.

He plans to cover

of the distance before noon. How many

miles does he plan to drive before noon?

A. 285
B. 254
C. 126
D. 95

18. A cookie recipe calls for

cups of sugar. If you wanted to

make half the quantity shown in the recipe, how many cups of sugar
would you use?

A.

B.

C.

D.

Question 19 is based on the following information.
Carbide Steel Drill Bits

Description

Size (inches)

Price

Cutter

$6.19

Core Box

$16.40

Classic

$17.85

Bevel

$10.50

19. Which of the following shows the drill bits arranged in order from
least to greatest in size?
A. cutter, bevel, classic, core box
B. core box, bevel, classic, cutter
C. bevel, classic, cutter, core box
D. core box, classic, bevel, cutter

20. Joe is going to order a pizza. He will eat at least

of it. If

he’s very hungry, he might eat as much as

of it. Place two

points on the number line below to represent the minimum fraction of
the pizza Joe might have left over and the maximum fraction of the
pizza Joe might have left over.

21. A project should take no more than 60 hours. If John can spare 7.5
hours per day to work on the project, what is the maximum number of
days it will take him to finish?
A. 6
B. 7
C. 8
D. 9

22. How many miles would a map distance of

1 in. = 240 mi?
A. 40
B. 130
C. 150
D. 200

inch represent if

23. A survey shows that

those,

of all homeown-ers have a pet. Of

have either a dog or cat. Of the homeowners

surveyed, what fraction has either a dog or a cat?

A.

B.

C.

D.

24. At Wyman Shipping, 140 employees work during the day shift. At

night, the crew is

the size of the day shift. How many

workers are scheduled to work the night shift?
A. 28
B. 56
C. 70
D. 94
Question 25 refers to the following map.
The map below shows the distance, in miles, between four stores.

25. Maya drives a van that delivers supplies to each of the stores. On
Friday, she traveled the following route.
Store A to Store B
Store B to Store C
Store C to Store D
Store D to Store C
Store C to Store A
How many miles did she drive in all?
A. 13.9
B. 15.1
C. 17.9
D. 19.1
26. From a wooden dowel

feet long, Jamie cut two pieces, each

feet long. How long, in feet, is the remaining piece?

A.

B.

C.
D. 5

27. Luis bought 20 shares of stock, priced at $26.38 per share. He also
paid an $8 transaction fee. How much did he pay for the shares and the
fee?
A. $687.60
B. $535.60
C. $527.60
D. $519.60
28. A mat board is 60 inches wide. How many strips measuring 0.75
inches wide can be cut from the board? (Assume no waste from the
cuts.)
Write your answer on the line below.
________________________
29. Of his take-home pay each month, Jerry spends
and

on a car payment

on food. What fraction of his take-home pay is left after

paying for these two items?
Write your answer on the line below.
________________________
Answers and explanations begin on page 664.

CHAPTER 3

Ratio, Proportion, and Percent
Lesson 1: Ratio and Proportion
Key Ideas
A ratio has two terms and can be written in words, with a colon, or as a
fraction.
Ratios are simplified by reducing to lowest terms.
The terms in a ratio can have different labels.

Ratio
A ratio compares two numbers. You can write a ratio using the word to,
using a colon (:), or using fraction form.
Example 1: A softball pitcher strikes out four batters for every one batter that
she walks. What is the ratio of strikeouts to walks?
Always write the numbers in the ratio in the same order in which they appear
in the question.

4 to 1 4:1

Ratios are similar to fractions. They have two terms, and they can be
simplified by reducing to lowest terms.
Example 2: Frank manages a small drugstore. During a two-hour period, he
counts 25 cash sales and 15 credit card sales. What is the ratio of
credit card to cash sales?
1. Write the ratio as a fraction with the terms in the correct order: credit
card to cash sales.

2. Reduce to lowest terms. The ratio of credit card to cash sales is 3 to 5.

There are some fraction rules that ratios do not follow. Do not change a ratio
that is an improper fraction to a mixed number. Also, if a ratio in fraction
form has a denominator of 1, do not write it as a whole number. Leave it in
fraction form.

GED® TEST TIP
The terms in a ratio must be written in the order given by the
words of the question. Don’t be fooled by an answer choice on

a multiple-choice question that reverses the order of the
numbers.
Another important difference is in the use of labels. The terms in a fraction
have the same unit labels:

of a pie means 5 slices out of 6 slices. Ratios

may have different labels: The sale advertised 6 cans for $1, a 6:1 ratio.
To write a ratio, you may need to perform one or more basic operations to
find one of the terms.
Example 3: A football team won 12 games and lost 8. There were no tied
games. What is the ratio of games won to games played?
1. The problem does not tell you the number of games played. Add the
games won to the games lost to find the games played.

2. Write the ratio in the correct order and simplify. The team won 3
games for every 5 games it played, a 3:5 ratio.

Practice 1.1
A. Write each ratio as a fraction in lowest terms.
1. Stan made 24 sales in 6 hours. What is the ratio of sales to hours?
2. Carol’s monthly take-home pay is $1500. She spends $250 a month
on food. What is the ratio of food costs to take-home dollars?
3. A toy rocket travels 180 ft in 15 sec. What is the ratio of feet to

seconds?
4. At Phil’s work, there are 12 part-time workers and 18 full-time
workers. What is the ratio of part-time workers to total workers?
5. Juanita drove 336 miles on 14 gallons of gasoline. What is the ratio
of miles to gallons?
6. Lynn estimates that a roofing job will cost $1500. Bo estimates that
the same job will cost $2400. What is the ratio of Lynn’s estimate to
Bo’s estimate?
7. A basketball player attempted 32 free throws and made 20. What is
the ratio of free throws made to free throws missed?
8. There are 10 men and 14 women in Kathleen’s math class. What is
the ratio of women to the total number of students in the class?
9. To paint his apartment, Alex bought 6 gallons of paint to cover
1440 square feet. What is the ratio of square feet to gallons of paint?
B. Choose the one best answer to each question.
Questions 10 through 12 refer to the following information.
Three candidates are running for mayor. Below are the results of a survey
of 600 registered voters.
Candidate

Number of Supporters

Stothard

220

Mesa

180

Newmark

50

Undecided

150

10. What is the ratio of Mesa’s supporters to Stothard’s supporters?
A. 9:11
B. 11:9
C. 11:20
D. 20:11
11. What is the ratio of voters who prefer Mesa to the total number

surveyed?
A. 3 to 7
B. 3 to 10
C. 3 to 13
D. 11 to 30
12. What is the ratio of undecided voters to voters who have made a
decision?

A.

B.

C.

D.

13. Soan made a $400 down payment on a washer and dryer that cost a
total of $1200. What is the ratio of the amount Soan has paid to the
amount he still owes?
A. 1 to 4
B. 1 to 3
C. 1 to 2
D. 2 to 3
14. A team played 77 games and won 56 of them. There were no tied
games. What is the ratio of wins to losses?
A. 3:8
B. 8:11
C. 11:8
D. 8:3
Answers and explanations begin on page 664.

Proportion
A proportion is an equation that shows that two ratios are equal. The cross
products in a true proportion are equal. In other words, when you multiply
diagonally across the equals sign, the products are equal.
Example 4: The directions on a can of powdered drink mix say to add 3 cups
of water to every 2 scoops of drink mix. Matt adds 12 cups of water
to 8 scoops of drink mix. Did he make the drink correctly?

1. Write a proportion, making sure the terms of the ratios are in the same
order.

2. Cross multiply and compare the products. Since the products are the
same, the ratios are equal. Matt made the drink correctly.
In most proportion problems, you are asked to solve for a missing term.
Example 5: A map scale says that
. What actual
distance would a map distance of 5 inches represent?
1. Write a proportion with both ratios in the same form: inches to miles.
The variable x represents the unknown distance.

2. Locate the term in the first ratio that is diagonal from the known term

in the second ratio. Cross multiply.
3. Divide the result by the remaining known term to find the value of x.
Some proportion problems ask you to find a rate. A rate compares a quantity
to 1. When a rate is written in fraction form, its denominator is always 1. In
word form, rates are often expressed using the word per.
Example 6: Connie drove 276 miles on 12 gallons of gasoline. How many
miles per gallon did she get on the trip?
1. Gas mileage is one kind of rate. You need to find how many miles
Connie drove on one gallon of gasoline.

2. Solve.
Using your calculator, you can solve proportion problems in one series of
calculations.

Example 7: Find the value of x in the proportion

.

You need to multiply 16 and 21, then divide by 6. On the TI-30XS
MultiViewTM calculator:
1. Press
2. Then press
The missing term is 56.

. The right side of the display will read 56.

NOTE: When working a problem, ask yourself if it can be solved using
proportion. This may be possible when two quantities are compared or when
three values are given and you are asked to find a fourth.

Practice 1.2
A. Solve for the missing term in each proportion problem. You MAY use
your calculator for questions 9 through 16. NOTE: Answers will not
always be whole numbers.

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.
6.

7.

8.

9.
10.

11.

12.

13.
14.
15.

16.

B. Choose the one best answer to each question. You MAY use your
calculator for questions 20 through 22.
17. A store is advertising the following sale:

Tomato Soup 4 cans for $0.98

To the nearest cent, how much would five cans of tomato soup cost?
A. $0.25
B. $1.23
C. $2.45
D. $4.90
18. The Bay City Cardinals have won 5 out of 8 games. At the same rate,
how many games will they have to play to win 60 games?
A. 180
B. 120
C. 96
D. 12
19. Carla drove her truck 414 miles on 18 gallons of gasoline. How many
miles did she drive per gallon?
A. 18
B. 23
C. 74
D. 95
20. The scale on a map reads, “
.”How many kilometers
would be represented by a distance of 4.6 centimeters?
A. 300
B. 345
C. 690
D. 1380
21. Two ingredients in a recipe are

cups of flour and

cups

of sugar. If June keeps the proportion the same, how many cups of
flour should she add to 4 cups of sugar?

A.
B. 6
C. 5
D.

22. Claudia drove 155 miles in 2.5 hours. Which of the following
expressions could be used to find how many miles she can drive in 7
hours?
A.
B.
C.
D.
Answers and explanations begin on page 665.

Lesson 2: Percents
Percent means “per hundred” or “out of one hundred.” For example, if you
have $100 and you spend $25, you spent $25 out of $100, or 25% of your
money.

Key Ideas
The percent symbol (%) means “out of 100.”
The three elements of a percent problem are the base, the part, and the
rate.

Percent problems can be solved by writing a proportion that has a
denominator of 100.
Since percent is a way of showing part of a whole, it has much in common
with fractions and decimals. To convert a percent to a fraction, write the
percent over 100 and reduce. To convert percents to decimals, drop the
percent symbol and move the decimal point two places to the left.
Percent to Fraction

Percent to Decimal

In any percent problem, there are three elements: the base, the part, and the
rate. The base is the whole quantity, or amount, that the problem is about.
The part (also called a percentage) is a portion of the base. The rate is a
number followed by the percent symbol (%).
Example 1: At a restaurant, Janice’s bill is $20. She gives the waiter a tip of
$3, which is 15% of her bill. Identify the base, part, and rate in this
situation.
The entire bill of $20 is the base. The $3 tip is part of the base, and the rate is
15%.
One way to think of a percent problem is as a proportion. In Example 1, there
are two ratios. The $3 tip is part of the $20 total bill, and 15% is the same as
. Since the two ratios are equal, they can be written as a proportion.

GED® TEST TIP

The word “of ” often comes before the base in a percent
problem. For example, if you are asked to find 75% of 250, you
know that 250 is the base.
Cross multiply to prove the ratios are equal.

You can solve percent problems by setting up a proportion and solving for
the missing elements. Just remember to express the percent as a number over
100.
Example 2: At a plant that manufactures lighting fixtures, it is expected that
about 2% of the fixtures assembled each day will have some type of
defect. If 900 fixtures are completed in one day, how many are
expected to be defective?

1. Write a proportion. Remember that 2% means 2 out of 100. Use the
variable x to stand for the number of defective fixtures.
2. Solve for x. Cross multiply and divide by the remaining number. The
company can expect about 18 defective fixtures.

Practice 2
A. For each situation, identify and label the base, part, and rate.
1. Victor owes his uncle $1000. Recently, he gave his uncle $200. The
payment was 20 percent of the money he owes.
2. On a test with 80 problems, Sophie got 72 problems right. In other
words, she ans-wered 90 percent of the problems correctly.
3. The Kang family made a down payment of $2,740 on a new car.
The down payment was 20 percent of the purchase price of $13,700.
4. Zoe’s take-home pay each month is $2000. She spends $500 on rent
each month, which is 25 percent of her take-home pay.
5. This year, Rafael has 60 regular customers, which is 150 percent of
the 40 regular customers he had last year.
6. Kayla bought a dress for $38. She paid $3.23 in sales tax. The sales
tax rate in her state is 8.5 percent.
7. Misako’s employer withholds 15 percent of her salary each
paycheck for taxes. Misako earns $900 each week, and her tax
withholding is $135.
8. Harrison got a 10 percent raise. Before the raise, his hourly wage
was $10.70. Now he earns an additional $1.07 per hour.
9. Kim Industries has 800 employees. Of those, 200 workers, or 25
percent, work part-time.
10. In an election, 5,000 of the 12,500 registered voters actually voted.
Only 40 percent of the registered voters actually voted.
B. Choose the one best answer to each question. Use the proportion
to solve each problem.
Questions 11 and 12 refer to the following information.
A local newspaper printed the following high school basketball standings:
Team
Fairfax

Wins
9

Losses
3

Hamilton

8

4

Bravo

6

6

Mountain View

4

8

Lincoln

3

9

11. Which of the following expressions could be used to find what percent
of its total games Fairfax has won?

A.

B.

C.

D.

12. What percent of its games did Bravo win?
A. 100%
B. 75%
C. 60%
D. 50%
13. A jacket with a price tag of $128 is on a rack with the following sign:

All Items:
25% off marked price
Discount taken at register

By how much will the price be reduced when the jacket is taken to the
register?
A. $4
B. $25
C. $32
D. $96
Answers and explanations begin on page 665.

Lesson 3: Using the Percent Formula
Solving for Part
Key Ideas
You can use a formula to solve percent problems:
To change a percent to a decimal, drop the % sign and move the
decimal point two places to the left.
To change a decimal to a percent, move the decimal point two places to
the right and add the % sign.
You have seen how to use proportion to solve percent problems. You can
also solve percent problems using the formula
.
Study the diagram at the right to learn how to use the formula. To use the

diagram, cover the element you need to solve for:
(percent), and
remaining elements.

,

. Then perform the operation that connects the

Example 1: A company offers its employees two health plans. In a recent
newsletter, the personnel department stated that 70% of the
employees chose Plan A. If the company has 320 workers, how many
chose Plan A?
1. The rate is 70%, and the base is 320, the total number of workers. You
need to solve for the part. Using the diagram, cover P for part. You can
see that you need to multiply to solve the problem.

2. Change the percent to a decimal and multiply. Out of 320 workers,
224 chose Plan A.
70% = 0.7
320×0.7 = 224

GED® TEST TIP
When you take the Mathematical Reasoning Test, make a quick

sketch of the percent diagram on the wipe-off board to help you
analyze percent problems.

Solving for Rate
Rewrite the percent formula to solve for rate. Use the formula
. You can use the diagram to help you remember
the formula.
Example 2: A computer system is regularly priced at $1600. On Friday, the
manager reduced the price by $640. By what percent did the manager
discount the computer system?
1. The base is $1600, the regular price. The part is $640, the amount the
price was reduced. You are asked to find the rate of the discount. Cover
R for rate (percent). You need to divide the part by the base to solve the
problem.

2. Divide 640 by 1600.
3. Convert the decimal answer to a percent by moving the decimal point
two places to the right and adding the percent sign. The price reduction
was a 40% discount.

Always ask yourself whether your answer seems reasonable. For example,

you know that 40% is a little less than

, and

of $1600 is $800.

Since $640 is a little less than $800, it is a reasonable answer.

Practice 3.1
A. Solve. You MAY use a calculator for questions 9 through 16.
1. What is 20% of $25?
2. Find 90% of 200.
3. What is 35% of 400?
4. What percent is 19 out of 20?
5. 42 is what percent of 168?
6. What percent is $18 out of $600?
7. Find

of 51. (Hint:

)

8. What is 125% of $48?
9. 240 is what percent of 120?
10. What percent is 3 out of 60?
11. $52 is what percent of $650?
12. Find

of $46.

13. $0.65 is what percent of $10.00?
14. Find 28% of $1300.
15. What percent is 2.5 out of 4?
16. Find

of 108. (Hint:

)

B. Choose the one best answer to each question. You MAY use your
calculator.

17. Pat called 120 customers to offer a software upgrade. Of those he
called, 72 purchased the upgrade. What percent agreed to the
purchase?
A. 40%
B. 48%
C. 60%
D.

18. Douglas received a 6 percent raise. If his old monthly salary was
$2,250, what is his monthly salary now? (Hint: Find the amount of the
raise. Then add the raise to the previous monthly salary.)
A. $2,256
B. $2,385
C. $3,600
D. $13,500
19. At a restaurant, Levy’s total bill is $46.If he wants to tip 15 percent,
how much should he leave as a tip?
A. $690.00
B. $31.00
C. $15.00
D. $6.90
20. The following advertisement for sporting goods appeared in the
newspaper. What percent of the original price is the sale price?

Little League Package
Magnum bat, tote bag, and youth cleats
Only $45.50
Originally $65

A. 20%
B. 31%
C. 44%
D. 70%
21. Lydia pays $3 sales tax on a $50 purchase. Which of the following
expressions could be used to find the sales tax rate in her state?

A.

B.
C.
D.
Answers and explanations begin on page 665.

Solving for Base
Some problems on the Mathematical Reasoning Test may require you to
solve for the base in a percent situation. Remember, the base represents the
whole item or group. Read each situation carefully to figure out which
element is missing. Then choose the correct method for solving the problem.
Example 3: In a math class, 75% of the students got at least a B grade on the
final exam. If 18 students got at least a B, how many students are in
the class?
1. Analyze the situation. The 18 students are part of the larger class. You

know that the 18 students are 75% of the whole group, so 75% is the
rate and the base is unknown.
Use the diagram. Cover B for base. You need to divide the part by the
rate to solve the problem.

2. Convert the rate to a decimal

and divide. There are

24 students in the class.

Most of the time, we work with percents that are less than 100%. When a
percent is less than 100%, the part is less than the base. However, it is
possible to have a situation in which the part is greater than the base. When
this occurs, the percent will be greater than 100%.
Example 4: The workforce at Eastland Inc. is growing rapidly. The number of
employees this year is 225% of the number last year. If there are 135
employees this year, how many employees did the company have last
year?
1. The base is the number of employees the company had last year. This
year’s number is a percent of last year’s number. Therefore, the rate is
225%, the part is 135, and the base is unknown.

2. Convert 225% to a decimal. Drop the % sign and move the decimal
point two places to the left.

3. Divide the part (135) by the rate (2.25). Last year, there were only 60
employees.

There is often more than one way to approach the solution to a problem. Both
the percent formula presented in this lesson and the proportion method from
Lesson 1 can be used to solve Example 4.

Formula method:

Proportion method:

If you evaluate both methods using a calculator, both expressions equal 60,
the correct solution.
NOTE: Don’t begin calculations before you completely analyze a situation.
Every percent problem has three elements. Make sure you know which one is
missing before you multiply or divide.

Practice 3.2
A. Find the missing element in each set. You MAY NOT use a calculator.
1. $35 is 20% of what amount?
2. 5% of what number is 14?
3. 3.2 is 50% of what number?
4. $170 is 85% of what amount?
5. 24 is 80% of what number?
6. $105 is 125% of what amount?
7. 190 is 95% of what number?
8. What number is 15% of 60?
9. 90% of $15 is what number?
10. $42 is what percent of $168?
11. $150 is 200% of what amount?
12. 15% of $62 is what amount?
13. 9 is 1% of what number?
14. What percent is 126 of 140?
15. 65% of $1200 is what amount?
16. 5% of an amount is $156. What is the amount?
17.

of a number is 100. What is the number?

18. What percent is $15.60 of $156.00?
B. Choose the one best answer to each question. You MAY use your
calculator.
19. Kevin’s total payroll deductions are 30 percent of his earnings. If his
deductions add up to $369 for a two-week period, how much were his
earnings for the period?
A. $110.70
B. $123.00
C. $1,230.00
D. $11,070.00
20. A city council established the following budget to improve public

transportation.
Project Budget
Salaries

50%

Office lease

35%

Equipment

6%

Supplies

2%

Miscellaneous

7%

If $72,000 is allotted for equipment, what is the total budget for the
project?
A. $432,000
B. $940,000
C. $1,200,000
D. $120,000,000
21. Jack earns a 5 percent commission on each sale. If he is paid a $160
commission, which of the following expressions could be used to find
the amount of the sale?

A.

B.

C.
D.

22. American Loan Company mailed 3600 customers an application for a
new
credit card. Only 20 percent of the customers returned the application.
How many customers returned the application?
A. 72
B. 180
C. 720
D. 180,000
Answers and explanations begin on page 665.

Lesson 4: Percent Calculator Skills
By changing a percent to either a fraction or decimal, you can use a calculator
to solve percent problems.

Key Ideas
One way to solve percent problems on the calculator is to change the
percent to a decimal or a fraction.
On the TI-30XS MultiViewTM calculator, you can use the percent 2nd
function to find the part and the base.
To create a percent, use the 2nd function, %, which is in green over the
left parenthesis (key.
Example 1: What is 25% of 120? Try both decimals and fractions.

Using either decimals or fractions, you can find that 30 is 25% of 120.

When you use the percent 2nd function, you don’t have to convert the percent
to a fraction or decimal. Practice this function below to multiply to find the
part when you are given the rate (percent).

The amount $234 is 65% of $360.
You can use the percent function to divide to find the base when given the
rate.

GED® TEST TIP
Practice using the delete key when you make a mistake in a
problem. That will erase your latest entry. The clear key will
erase the entire entry.

The original cost of the stereo appears on the right of the display: $750.

Practice 4
A. Solve. You MAY use your calculator.
1. Find 46% of $130.
2. 14% of what amount is $13.44?
3. What is 12% of $126?
4. What number is

of 64?

5. 12 is what percent of 400?
6. A number is 32% of 6500. What is the number?
7. 36 is what percent of 144?
8. 90% of what number is 63?
9. Find 7% of 360.
10. What number is

of 237?

11. 25 is what percent of 1000?
12. What is

of 384?

13. 390 is what percent of 500?
14. Find 2% of $800.
15. 32% of what number is 80?
16. What number is

of 16?

17. $112 is what percent of $1600?
18. A number is

of 414. What is the number?

B. Choose the one best answer to each question. You MAY use your
calculator.
Questions 19 and 20 refer to the following chart.
Shipping and Handling Information
For items costing:

% of order + handling:

$20 or less

3% + $1.50

$20.01 to $50

4% + $2.50

$50.01 to $100

5% + $4.00

$100.01 or more

8%

19. Chanel placed an $84 order. How much shipping and handling will she
be charged on her order?
A. $4.20
B. $4.40
C. $8.20
D. $8.36
20. Jason placed an order totaling $110. Zola placed a $90 order. How
much more did Jason pay in shipping and handling than Zola?
A. $0.30
B. $4.30
C. $4.50
D. $20.00
21. In an election, 3190 out of 3625 registered voters voted against a tax
increase. What percent of the registered voters voted against the
increase?
A. 43%
B. 83%
C. 88%
D. 98%
22. A baseball player has the following statistics. To the nearest percent,
what percent of the player’s at bats were strikeouts?
At
Bats

Hits

Home Walks Strikeouts
Runs

410

108

2

70

63

A. 90%
B. 58%
C. 26%
D. 15%
Answers and explanations begin on page 665.

Lesson 5: Simple Interest
Interest is a fee paid for the use of someone else’s money. If you put money
in a savings account, you receive interest from the bank. If you borrow
money, you pay interest. In each case, the amount that you invest or borrow
is called the principal.

Key Ideas
Simple interest is found by multiplying principal, rate, and time:
.
The time must be written in terms of years. Write months as a fraction
of a year.
To find the amount paid back, add the principal and the interest.
Simple interest is a percent of the principal multiplied by the length of the
loan. The formula for finding simple interest is given on the formulas sheet of
the Mathematical Reasoning Test (see page 413). It reads:

You may find it easier to remember the formula using variables (letters that
stand for numbers):

, where

,

,

, and

. Writing

variables next to each other means that they are to be multiplied.
Example 1: Asher borrows $2500 from his uncle for three years at 6% simple
interest. How much interest will he pay on the loan?

1. Write the rate as a decimal.
2. Substitute the known values in the formula. Multiply.
Asher will pay $450 in interest.

GED® TEST TIP
An onscreen formula sheet (see page 413) is provided when
you take the Mathematical Reasoning Test. The formula for
simple interest is printed close to the bottom of that sheet.
Every time you see a formula in this book, check to see if it is
on the formula sheet. If the formula is not there, you will need
to memorize it.
Some problems ask you to find the amount paid back. This adds an additional step to an interest problem. In Example 1, Asher will owe $450 in
interest at the end of three years. However, he will pay back the interest

($450) plus the principal ($2500):
. When he has finished
paying the loan, Asher will have paid his uncle $2950.
In a simple interest problem, the rate is an annual, or yearly, rate. Therefore,
the time must also be expressed in years.
Example 2: Eva invests $3000 for 9 months. She will be paid 8% simple
interest on her investment. How much interest will she earn?
1. Write the rate as a decimal.
2. Express the time as a fraction of a year by writing the length of time in
months over 12, the number of months in a year.
3. Multiply.

Eva will earn $180 in interest.

Practice 5
A. Solve these problems using the formula for simple interest. You MAY
use your calculator.
1. Leah borrows $1500 for 2 years at a 12% interest rate. Find the
interest on the loan.
2. How much interest would you pay on a loan of $800 for 6 months at
14% interest?
3. Dominica invested $2000 for 3 years at an interest rate of 7%. How

much interest did she earn on her money?
4. How much interest would you earn on an investment of $600 for 8
years at 10% interest?
5. Todd invests $6500 for

years at 5% interest. How much

interest will he be paid at the end of the time period?
6. Ricardo borrows $1850 for 8 months at 12% interest. What is the
total amount he will pay back at the end of the loan period?
7. Yanira puts $5000 in an investment account for 4 years. If she is
paid

simple interest, how much interest will she earn?

B. Choose the one best answer to each question. You MAY use your
calculator.
8. Jean borrowed $1300 to buy tools for her job as an auto mechanic. The
loan is for 1 year 6 months at 9 percent simple interest. Which of the
following expressions could be used to find the amount she will pay
back at the end of the loan period?
A.
B.
C.
D.
9. Noah borrows $8000 for 5 years to make improvements to his home
office. If the simple interest rate is 6 percent, how much will he pay in
interest?
A. $2400
B. $1040
C. $420
D. $400
10. Caleb borrowed $1500 from his aunt. He plans to pay his aunt back in

9 months. If he pays 4 percent interest on the loan, what is the total
amount he will pay back in 9 months?
A. $1455
B. $1545
C. $1560
D. $2040
Questions 11 and 12 refer to the following information.
Option

Length of Loan
years

Simple Interest Rate

A

2

12%

B

3 years

10%

C

4 years

9%

11. Charlotte needs to borrow $2400. She is considering the three loan
options shown above. How much more interest would Charlotte pay if
she takes loan option C instead of option A?
A. $108
B. $144
C. $720
D. $864
12. Charlotte chooses Option B, but she decides to borrow $2800. What is the
total amount she will pay back when the loan is due?
A. $2830
B. $3240
C. $3556
D. $3640
Answers and explanations begin on page 666.

Lesson 6: Percent of Change
Key Ideas
The amount of change is the difference between the new number and
the original number.
Find the percent of change by dividing the amount of change by the
original number.
Percent of increase may be greater than 100%.
Percent is often used to show change.
Example 1: Michelle recently started her own business. Last month, she
earned $1000. This month, she earned $2000. How could she
describe the increase in her earnings?
All of the following statements accurately describe the change.
Michelle’s earnings doubled from last month to this month.
This month, her earnings increased by 100%.
This month’s earnings are 200% of last month’s earnings.
Percent of change compares a new number, which shows an increase or a
decrease, to the original number—the number before the change.
Example 2: Before her raise, Lisa earned $10.50 per hour. Now she earns
$11.34 per hour. What percent raise did her boss give her?
1. Subtract to find the amount of change.

2. Divide the amount of change by $10.50, Lisa’s wage before the
change. Convert the decimal to a percent. Lisa’s hourly wage
increased by 8%.

Think carefully about a situation to decide which number is the original
amount.

GED® TEST TIP
You can work backward
to check your answers. For example, if a price has decreased
by 25%, the new price should be 75% of the original price,
since
.
Example 3: A jacket is on sale for $90. Three days ago, the jacket was on sale
for $120. By what percent was the price of the jacket reduced?
1. Subtract to find the amount of change.

2. The price of the jacket was $120 before it was $90, so $120 is the
original price. Divide the amount of change by $120. The new price is
25% less than the price three days ago.

Percent of increase may be greater than 100%.
Example 4: Calvin started his business with 10 employees. Now he has 60
employees. By what percent has his workforce increased?
1. Subtract to find the amount of change.

2. Divide by the original number. Convert the number to a percent.
Calvin’s workforce has increased by 500%.

Practice 6
A. Solve as directed. If necessary, round your answer to the nearest
percent. You MAY use your calculator for questions 7 through 10.
1. Find the percent of increase from 2000 to 3000.
2. Find the percent of decrease from $2.00 to $1.25.
3. What is the percent of increase from 30 to 90?
4. Find the percent of decrease from 20 to 11.
5. Find the percent of increase from $25 to $30.
6. What is the percent of decrease from 500 to 340?
7. Find the percent of increase from $1.89 to $2.29.
8. What is the percent of decrease from 21 to 3?
9. Find the percent of increase from 65 to 338.
10. What is the percent of decrease from $1550 to $1025?
B. Choose the one best answer to each question. You MAY use your
calculator.
11. Justin recently moved from a part-time to a full-time job. Because of
the change, his weekly pay increased from $280 to $448. To the
nearest percent, by what percent did his income increase?
A. 38%
B. 60%
C. 168%
D. 267%
12. David bought a computer game on sale for $36. The game was
originally $48. What was the percent of decrease in the game’s price?
A. 12%
B. 25%

C.
D. 75%
13. The Utleys’ rent increased from $600 to $636 per month. By what
percent did the rent increase?
A. 4%
B. 5%
C. 6%
D. 7%
Questions 14 and 15 refer to the following information.
Marc sells computer equipment. He buys printers at wholesale and sells
them at retail price. Customers who join his discount club pay the
member’s price.
Printer Pricing Chart
Model Number

Wholesale Price

Retail
Price

Member’s
Price

L310

$63.00

$141.75

$92.15

L1430

$86.00

$150.50

$105.35

14. What is the percent of increase from wholesale to retail price of the
L310 model?
A. 56%
B. 78%
C. 125%
D. 225%
15. For the L1430 model, what is the percent of decrease from retail price
to member’s price?
A. 26%

B. 30%
C. 43%
D. 53%
Answers and explanations begin on page 666.

Ratio, Proportion, and Percent Practice
Questions
Directions: You MAY use your calculator.
1. From a total yearly budget of $360,000, the Kimball Foundation
spends $30,000 on leasing office space. What is the ratio of dollars
spent on office space to dollars spent on other costs?
A. 12:1
B. 11:1
C. 1:11
D. 1:12
2. A worker can assemble 5 motors in 2 hours. Which of the expressions
below could be used to find how long it would take the worker to
assemble 50 motors?

A.

B.

C.

D.
3. Frank owns a discount music store. The table below shows how much
Frank pays for certain merchandise items.
Item

Wholesale Price

CDs

$7.20

Posters

$5.60

To find his selling price, Frank increases each price by 35 percent.
What is the selling price of a poster?
A. $9.72
B. $7.56
C. $5.95
D. $1.96
4. Neva’s car is now worth $12,000. This is 60 percent of what she paid
for it. How much did she pay for the car?
A. $7,200
B. $18,000
C. $19,200
D. $20,000
5. At a shop, the ratio of union to nonunion workers is 7 to 3. If there are
18 nonunion workers at the shop, how many union workers are there?
A. 21
B. 25
C. 42

D. 126
6. Camilla earned $954 in commission on $15,900 in sales. What is her
rate of commission?
A. 6%
B. 9%
C.
D. 60%
7. John spent the following amounts of time building a workbench:

What is the ratio of time spent cutting
wood to total time spent on the project?
A. 1:9
B. 1:6
C. 1:5
D. 3:7
Questions 8 and 9 refer to the following information.
Ford County Farmland Usage
Total Acreage: 40,000
Usage

Number of Acres

Dairy

22,000

Nursery/greenhouse

3,600

Vegetables/fruits

5,200

Grains

9,200

8. What percent of Ford County farmland is used for the growing of grains,
vegetables, or fruits?
A. 23%
B. 36%
C. 57%
D. 64%
9. One dairy farmer in Ford County is considering selling her farm to
developers, who will convert it from a dairy farm to a resort. If this
happens, the amount of farmland devoted to dairy in Ford County will
decrease by
20 percent. How many total acres of farmland will Ford County then have
if the dairy farmer decides to sell?
A. 35,600
B. 32,000
C. 17,600
D. 4,400
10. A serving of peanut butter contains 3 grams of saturated fat and 13 grams
of unsaturated fat. This amount of fat is 25 percent of the recommended
amount of fat in a 2000-calorie diet. What is the ratio of grams of
saturated fat to total fat in a serving of peanut butter?

A.

B.

C.

D.

11. A drawing of a company logo is 4 inches wide and 5 inches long. If the
drawing is enlarged so that it is 12.5 inches long, and the original
proportions remain unchanged, how many inches wide will the enlarged
drawing be?
A. 7.5
B. 10
C. 15.625
D. 20
12. A local hospital currently has 184 male patients. If the ratio of male to
female patients is 4:3, how many female patients are there in the hospital?
Write your answer on the line below.
________________________
13. A newspaper advertisement contains the following information.
Busy Body Fitness Center
Inventory Reduction Blowout! All sale prices are 20% off original
price!
Equipment

Sale Price

Treadmill

$1512

Upright bike

$720

Home gym

$3148

In dollars, what was the original price of the upright bike?
Write your answer on the line below.
________________________
14. The Tigers’ ratio of wins to losses is 5 to 4. If the team continues winning
at the same rate, how many games will the Tigers win in a 72-game
season?
A. 20
B. 40
C. 37
D. 52
15. A television station called 400 adults and asked the following question:
“Do you approve of the governor’s new education program?” The table
below shows the results of the survey:
Response

Percent

Undecided

16%

Yes

32%

No

52%

Of the people called, how many did NOT answer “no”?
A. 64
B. 128
C. 192
D. 208
16. The price of a carton of computer paper decreased from $25 to $20. What
was the percent decrease in the price?
A. 80%
B. 50%

C. 20%
D. 5%
17. Six months ago, Sandra had 55 regular customers. Now, she has 220
percent as many regular customers as she had six months ago. How many
regular customers does Sandra have now?
A. 121
B. 90
C. 66
D. 25
18. If 1 gram of fat equals 9 calories, what percent of the calories in a
Munchies roast beef sandwich come from fat?
Munchies Sandwich Facts
Sandwich

Fat (grams)

Calories

Roast Beef

6

300

Club Classic

5

335

A. 2%
B. 3%
C. 6%
D. 18%
19. For every $8 in their budget, the Parks spend $3 on food. If their weekly
budget is $704, how much do they spend on food each week?
A. $88
B. $192
C. $235
D. $264
20. Suddeth Travel estimates that 80 percent of its employees have more than
12 days of unused sick leave. If 140 employees have more than 12 days
of unused sick leave, how many employees work at the agency?

A. 112
B. 164
C. 175
D. 700
21. The Gladstone Theater has 900 seats. At a recent show, the ratio of tickets
sold to tickets unsold was 11 to 1. How many tickets were sold?
A. 75
B. 810
C. 818
D. 825
22. Matthew put $2200 in a savings account for one year and six months. If
he earns simple interest at an annual rate of 8 percent, how much will he
have in the account at the end of the time period?
A. $2212
B. $2376
C. $2464
D. $2640
23. A television set that is regularly priced at $410 is on sale for 20 percent
off. What is the sale price of the television set?
A. $82
B. $328
C. $390
D. $492
24. On a county map shown below, the map scale reads, “0.5 in. = 60 mi.”
What is the actual distance, in miles, between Lakeview and Riverside?

A. 23
B. 165
C. 300
D. 330
Question 25 refers to the following information.
Leo’s Bookstore kept track of the number of customers who visited the store
over a 3-day period. Employees also recorded the number of customers who
made a purchase for each day during the same period.
Day

Number of Customers Number of Customers
Who Made a
Purchase

Friday

112

83

Saturday

138

45

Sunday

140

91

25. Which of the following could be used to find what percent of Sunday’s
customers did NOT make a purchase?
A.
B.

C.
D.
26. A school admits 9 out of every 14 who apply. At that rate, how many
students will be admitted if 420 apply?
Write your answer on the line below.
________________________
27. In a 40-hour workweek, Marcie spends 15 hours answering telephones.
What is the ratio of hours spent answering telephones to hours doing
other types of work? (Record your answer as a fraction.)
Write your answer on the line below.
________________________

CHAPTER 4

Data, Statistics, and Probability
Lesson 1: Tables and Pictographs
Key Ideas
Tables and graphs are often used to display data.
Always read all labels to understand what data are presented in the table
or graph.
If symbols are used in a graph, a key will explain what each symbol
represents.
Data are facts and information. By analyzing data, we can make predictions,
draw conclusions, and solve problems. To be useful, data must be organized
in some way. A table organizes data in columns and rows. The labels on the
table will help you understand what the data mean.
Example 1: The table below shows population figures for selected counties in
2000 and 2010 and the land area in square miles for each county.

County

2000 Pop.

2010
Pop.

Land Area in sq.
mi.

Adams

11,128

15,295

4,255

Bell

25,199

22,707

2,523

Cook

6,532

6,518

2,398

Davis

82,204

90,834

1,139

Evans

139,510

130,748

921

Which county showed the greatest percent of increase in population from
2000 to 2010?
1. Read the labels. The first column shows the county names. The second and third columns show population figures. The fourth column
shows land area data. You don’t need land area to answer this question.
2. Analyze the data. Only Adams and Davis counties show increases
from 2000 to 2010.
3. Use the data. Find the percent of increase for Adams and Davis
counties.
Adams:

Davis:

Adams County shows the greatest percent of increase in population from
2000 to 2010.

GED® TEST TIP
Tables provide a lot of information. When you are answering a
question based on a table, use only the information that is
needed to answer the question. In Example 1, the question is
about population, so you do not need to use information from
the last column.

A pictograph is another way to display data. Pictographs use symbols to
compare data. A key shows what value each symbol represents.
Example 2: A city has three public library branches. A librarian kept track of
the numbers of books checked out from each branch in a week. He
used the data to create the pictograph below.

From March 4 to March 10, how many books were checked out from the
South and West branches combined?
1. There are

symbols for the South Branch and 9 symbols for the

West branch. Add:

symbols.

2. Find the value of the symbols. The key states that each symbol equals
150 books. Multiply by 150:
books.

Practice 1
A. Use the table on page 280 to answer questions 1 and 2. Use the
pictograph on page 280 to answer questions 3 and 4. You MAY use a
calculator.
1. On average, how many people were there per square mile in Bell
County in 2010?
2. To the nearest percent, what was the percent of decrease in Evans
County’s population from 2000 to 2010?
3. How many more books were checked out from North Branch than
from South Branch during the week of March 4?
4. How many books were checked out from all three branches

combined?
B. Choose the one best answer to each question.
Questions 5 and 6 refer to the following table.
Percent of 3-year-old Children with School-Readiness Skills for the
Years 2004 and 2010
2004

2010

Recognizes all letters

11%

17%

Counts to 20 or higher

37%

47%

Writes own name

22%

34%

Reads or pretends to
read

66%

67%

5. If 100 children were surveyed in each year, which category showed
the least percent of increase from 2004 to 2010?
A. Recognizes all letters
B. Counts to 20 or higher
C. Writes own name
D. Reads or pretends to read
6. A community had 350 three-year-old children in 2010. If the chart is
representative of the community, how many were able to write their
own name?
A. 34
B. 97
C. 119
D. 134
Questions 7 and 8 refer to the following graph.

7. How many cars are parked in the garage from 12:01 to 4:30 p.m.?
A. 275
B. 350
C. 375
D. 650
8. How many more cars are parked from 8 a.m. to noon than are parked
after 4:30 p.m.?
A. 75
B. 100
C. 175
D. 200
Answers and explanations begin on page 667.

Lesson 2: Bar and Line Graphs
Key Ideas
A bar graph uses bars to represent numbers.
To find the value of a bar, compare its length to the scale shown on one
of the axis lines. Estimate the value.
A double-bar graph compares groups of data. Read the key to find the
meaning of the bars.

Working with Bar Graphs
A bar graph uses bars to represent values. Bar graphs have two axis lines.
One line shows a number scale, and the other shows labels for the bars. By
comparing the length of a bar to the scale, you can estimate what value the
bar represents.
Example 1: A national corporation made a bar graph (shown below) to show
the number of discrimination complaints made by employees during
a six-year period. About how many more complaints were made in
2010 than in 2009?
1. Read the labels. Each bar represents the number of complaints made
within a year. The years are shown beneath the bars.

2. Analyze the data. Compare the bars for 2009 and 2010 to the scale.
There were 20 complaints in 2009 and about 32 complaints in 2010.
3. Use the data. Subtract:
There were about 12 more
complaints in 2010 than in 2009.

GED® TEST TIP
You may not be able to find the exact value of a bar. If the bar
falls about halfway between two numbers on the scale, use a

whole number that lies in the middle.
A double-bar graph compares more than one type of data.
Example 2: A studio released four films in one year. The graph below
compares the cost of making each movie to its box-office receipts, or
ticket sales. Film B’s cost is what percent of its box-office receipts?
1. Read the labels. Read the key to find the meaning of the bars. Notice
that the scale represents millions of dollars.

2. Analyze the data. Film B’s cost is about $30 million. It brought in
about $65 million in receipts.
3. Use the data. Find what percent $30 is of $65.

Practice 2.1
A. For questions 1 through 3, use the bar graph entitled “Employee
Discrimination Complaints” on page 282. For questions 4 through 6,
use the bar graph entitled “Profit Analysis for Four Films” on page
282.
1. To the nearest 10, how many employee discrimination complaints
were there in 2006 and 2007?
2. To the nearest 5, how many more complaints were there in 2011

than in 2006?
3. By what percent did the number of complaints decrease from 2008
to 2009?
4. About how much more did it cost to make Film A than Film D?
5. Which film made the greatest amount of profit? (Hint: P
)
6. Film C’s cost was what percent of its box-office receipts?
B. Choose the one best answer to each question.
Questions 7 and 8 refer to the following graph.

7. Approximately how many more T-shirts were sold than books and
toys combined?
A. 40
B. 70
C. 80
D. 90
8. One-half of the games sold during the week of September 20 were on
sale for $16. The rest sold for the full price of $24. Approximately
how much money did the store take in for games sold during the week

of September 20?
A. $400
B. $600
C. $800
D. $1000
Questions 9 and 10 refer to the following graph.

9. In May, what was the ratio of the number of 2-day permits to the number
of 5-day permits?
A. 2:5
B. 3:17
C. 14:3
D. 14:17
10. In which month was there a total of 80 permits issued?
A. June
B. July
C. August
D. September
Answers and explanations begin on page 667.

Working with Line Graphs

A line graph is useful for showing changes over time. By analyzing the rise
and fall of the line, you can tell whether something is increasing, decreasing,
or staying the same. Like a bar graph, a line graph has two axis lines. One is
marked with a scale; the other is marked in regular time intervals.
Example 3: The graph below shows the number of patients who visited an
emergency room for the treatment of scooter-related injuries.

In which month did the greatest increase in scooter-related injuries occur?
The points on the graph are positioned above the months, which are arranged
in calendar order. By examining the line that connects the points, you can tell
whether there was an increase or decrease from one month to the next.
A steeper line shows a greater increase; therefore, the greatest increase was
from July to August.
If a line graph has more than one line, a key will tell you what the lines
represent.
Example 4: The graph below shows the changes in ticket prices for two
amusement parks.

What was the last year in which the admission price to Park B was greater
than the admission price to Park A?
The admission prices for Park A are represented by a solid line. Park B’s
prices are shown with a dotted line. The graph begins in 2005. In 2005, Park
B’s ticket price is greater than Park A’s. Follow the two lines to the right.
Between 2007 and 2008, the lines cross, and Park A’s prices climb higher
than Park B’s. The year 2007 was the last time that Park B charged more
than Park A for a ticket.
NOTE: The steepest line shows the greatest increase or decrease, but it may
not show the greatest percent of change. When the original value is small, a
small change may result in a high percent of change.

Practice 2.2
A. For questions 1 through 3, use the graph from Westside Hospital on
page 284. For questions 4 through 6, use the graph “Comparison of
Admission Prices” on page 284.
1. In which month did the number of scooter-related injuries decrease?
2. To the nearest 10, how many emergency room visits were due to
scooter injuries in August, September, and October combined?
3. Which of the following shows the greater percent of increase: the
change in injuries from June to July or the change from August to
September?
4. About how much more did it cost to buy a ticket to Park A than a
ticket to Park B in 2009?

5. What was the percent of increase in the ticket prices at Park B from
2005 to 2010?
6. To the nearest 10, how much more did it cost to buy a ticket to Park
A in 2010 than in 2005?
B. Choose the one best answer to each question.
Questions 7 and 8 refer to the graph below.

7. Over what period of time did the price of goods actually decrease?
A. 1930 to 1940
B. 1940 to 1950
C. 1960 to 1970
D. 1970 to 1980
8. Goods purchased in 1970 were about what fraction of their cost in the
year 2000?
A.

B.
C.
D.
Questions 9 and 10 refer to the graph below.
Lamp Depot has two stores. The graph shows the sales data from the two
stores for an 8-week period.

9. About how many more sales were there at Store 2 than at Store 1 in
week 6?
A. 110
B. 50
C. 40
D. 25
10. During which week did Store 1 experience the greatest increase in
sales from the week before?
A. Week 2
B. Week 3
C. Week 4
D. Week 5
Answers and explanations begin on page 667.

Lesson 3: Circle Graphs
A circle graph is used to show how a whole amount is broken into parts. The
sections of a circle graph are often labeled with percents. The size of each
section corresponds to the fraction it represents. For example, a section
labeled 25% is
of the circle.

Key Ideas
In a circle graph, the circle represents a whole amount, and the sections
represent parts of the whole.
Sections are usually labeled with percents, but they can show amounts.
The size of each section of a circle graph is equal to the fraction or
percent it represents.
Example 1: A graph below shows how a children’s sports camp spends its
weekly budget.

How much does the sports camp spend on lunches each week?
1. Analyze the graph. According to the heading, the entire circle represents the camp’s weekly budget of $2250. Find the section labeled
“lunches.” According to the section label, lunches make up 35% of the
weekly budget.
2. Use the data. To find the amount spent on lunches, find 35% of $2250:
.
A circle graph may also be labeled using fractions or decimals. One common

kind of circle graph labels each section in cents to show how a dollar is used.

GED® TEST TIP
Since a circle graph represents a whole, or 100%, amounts can
easily be converted to percents. For example, $0.05 on a circle
graph can also represent 5%.
Example 2: According to the graph, what percent of the average energy bill is
spent on drying clothes, lighting, and heating water?

1. Analyze the graph. The entire circle represents $1. The amounts in the
sections mentioned in the problem are $0.03, $0.05, and $0.17.
2. Use the data. Add the amounts:
Since $0.25 is 25% of a dollar, 25% of an average bill is spent on these
items.

Practice 3
A. For questions 1 through 3, use the Sports Camp Weekly Budget circle
graph on page 286. For questions 4 through 6, use the Where Do Your
Energy Dollars Go? circle graph on page 286.

1. What percent of the total sports camp budget is spent on equipment
and umpires?
2. What fraction of the sports camp budget is spent on permits?
3. What amount does the camp spend each week on busing?
4. A family’s energy bill is $180. Assuming the family’s energy use is
typical, how much did the family spend on water heating?
5. Which section is greater than 50 percent of an energy dollar?
6. Which energy cost is about
of the energy dollar?
B. Choose the one best answer to each question.
Questions 7 and 8 refer to the following graph.

7. During a 40-hour workweek, how many hours does a records clerk
spend preparing documents?
A. 10
B. 15
C. 25
D. 30
8. What percent of a records clerk’s time is spent on tasks other than data
entry?
A. 25%
B. 31%
C. 44%
D. 56%
Questions 9 and 10 refer to the following graph.

The employees of National Bank are given the following graph to explain
how their retirement fund is invested.

9. What percent of each retirement dollar is invested in real estate and the
stock market?
A. 4%
B. 10%
C. 40%
D. 90%
10. Steve contributes $120 of each paycheck to his National Bank
retirement fund. How much of each contribution is invested in public
bonds?
A. $36
B. $40
C. $48
D. $84
Answers and explanations begin on page 668.

Lesson 4: Measures of Central Tendency
Key Ideas
A frequency table is used to show how often data occurs.
Tally marks are made next to a list to record the data.

Numerical data is often grouped in intervals.

Using a Frequency Table
A frequency table shows how often an item appears in a data set. The data is
in the form of tally marks next to a list of items.
Example 1: The sales manager at Montana Motors asked her sales staff to
keep a record of the color of the cars that were chosen for test-drives
in one month. Then she combined the data to make the frequency
table shown below.
Montana Motors—Car Color Preferences
white
black
red
green
silver
other
What was the ratio of black cars driven to silver cars driven?
1. Count the tally marks. There are 27 marks for black and 9 for silver.
2. Write the ratio and reduce to lowest terms.
The ratio of black to silver is 3 to 1. You can also say that the black cars are 3
times as popular as the silver cars.
Numerical data is often grouped in intervals. The table below shows data
grouped in intervals of 18 to 24, 25 to 40, and so on. This way of presenting
data is called a grouped frequency table.

GED® TEST TIP
If several problems refer to a frequency table, you may want to
count the tally marks for each line and record the numbers on
the wipe-off board provided at the testing center. Then use the
numbers to solve all related problems.
Example 2: The table below shows the ages of the customers at Louise’s
Diner for a four-day period. What percent of the customers were from
25 to 40 years old?
Louise’s Diner
Customers by Age Group, February 19–22
under 18
18–24
25–40
41–55
over 55
1. Find the data you need. There are 28 marks for the 25–40 age group.
Add the tally marks for all age groups to find the total number of
customers for the three-day period:
.
2. Find the percent. The base is 70, the total number of customers. The
part is 28, the number of customers in the desired age group. Solve for
the rate:
.

Practice 4.1
A. For questions 1 through 3, use the frequency table from Montana
Motors on page 287. For questions 4 through 6, use the frequency

table from Louise’s Diner on page 287.
1. What was the total number of test drives of black and white cars
combined?
2. How many more drivers chose red than silver cars?
3. What was the ratio of red cars to white cars chosen for test-drives?
4. What is the ratio of customers under 18 to those over 55?
5. What was the total number of customers from 18 to 40 years of age?
6. What percent of the total customers were from 41 to 55 years of
age? (Round your answer to the nearest whole percent.)
B. Choose the one best answer to each question.
Questions 7 and 8 refer to the following information.
The frequency table shows the reasons customers gave for returning
clothing merchandise to a store.
Reason

Number

Wrong size
Unwanted gift
Found flaw after purchase
Changed mind
7. What is the ratio of customers saying the clothes were the wrong size
to all the returns represented?
A.
B.
C.
D.
8. Approximately what percent of the customers who returned clothing

said that the clothes were an unwanted gift?
A. 20%
B. 25%
C. 45%
D. 50%
Questions 9 and 10 refer to the following information.
A personnel office gives typing tests to people applying for a job. The test
shows how many words per minute (wpm) a job applicant can enter
correctly. After testing 90 applicants, the manager made the following
table.
Typing Speed

Number

Under 30 wpm
30–45 wpm
46–60 wpm
Over 60 wpm
9. What percent of the applicants had a speed of under 30 wpm?
A. 14%
B. 25%
C. 28%
D. 39%
10. What is the ratio of applicants who could type at a speed above 45
wpm to those who could type at a speed of 45 wpm or less?
A. 1:3
B. 1:2
C. 2:3
D. 6:5
Answers and explanations begin on page 668.

Mean, Median, and Mode
Suppose you were asked how much money you usually spend on groceries in
a week. Some weeks, you may spend a great deal; other weeks, much less.
You would probably choose an amount in the middle to represent what you
typically spend. This middle value is called an average, or measure of
central tendency.
The most common type of average is the mean, or the arithmetic average.
Example 3: In five football games, a team scored 14, 21, 3, 20, and 10 points.
What is the mean, or average, score per game?
1. Add the values.

2. Divide by the number of items in the data set.
points per game
Although it is impossible for a football team to score 13.6 points in a game,
the number represents the center of the scores from the five games.
A calculator is useful for finding the mean. Do the calculations in two steps.
Enter the addition operations. Then, if you are using the TI-30XS
MultiView™, press enter to find the sum. Then key in the division operation.
Try Example 1 above with a calculator.
Another measure of average is the median. The median is the middle value
in a set of data.
Example 4: During a 7-hour period, a bookstore recorded the following
numbers of sales. Find the median number of sales.

Hour 1

Hour 2

43

28

Hour Hour Hour Hour Hour
3
4
5
6
7
24

36

32

37

48

1. Arrange the values by size.
24, 28, 32, 36, 37, 43, 48
2. Find the middle number.

If there is an even number of values, the median is the mean of the two
middle values.
Example 5: Robert has the following test scores in his math class: 90, 72, 88,
94, 91, and 80. What is the median score?
1. Arrange the values by size and find the
2. Find the mean of the two middle values. The median score is 89.
Add:
Divide by 2:
The mode is the value that occurs most often in a set of data. A set of data
could have more than one mode if several items occur the same number of
times. If each item of data occurs only once, there is no mode.
Example 6: Six weather stations recorded the following temperatures at 3:00
p.m.: 45°, 44°, 45°, 47°, 46°, and 45°. What is the mode of the data?
The temperature 45° occurs most often (3 times). The mode is 45°.

Practice 4.2
A. For each data set, find the mean, median, and mode. Round
calculations to the nearest hundredth or cent. You MAY use a
calculator.
1. Golf scores for 7 rounds:
76, 82, 75, 87, 80, 82, and 79

2. Sales totals for 6 weeks:
$5,624; $10,380; $8,102; $6,494; $12,008; and $8,315
3. Cost of lunch for 8 days:
$4.50, $5.25, $4.50, $3.75, $4.50, $5.25, $6.10, and $4.25
4. Miles driven per day for 5 days:
330, 286, 342, 300, and 287
5. Grocery bills for 4 weeks:
$97.48, $106.13, $110.98, and $92.74
6. Scores on 7 quizzes:
90, 72, 86, 100, 88, 78, and 88
7. High temperatures for 10 days:
96°, 103°, 98°, 101°, 98°, 100°, 100°, 97°, 98°, and 100°
8. Inches of rainfall over 3-day period:
2.5, 1.8, and 1.4
9. Attendance figures at a play:
305, 294, 328, 296, 305, 315, and 292
10. Hours worked per week for 5 weeks:
36, 40, 38, 40, and 40
B. Choose the one best answer to each question. You MAY use your
calculator.
Questions 11 and 12 refer to the following information.
Homes Sold in Fairfield Heights in June
Home

Asking Price

Selling Price

#1

$124,600

$116,500

#2

$132,400

$124,800

#3

$118,900

$116,500

#4

$98,500

$103,600

#5

$105,800

$109,000

#6

$122,400

$118,400

11. What was the mean asking price of the homes sold in Fairfield Heights in

June?
A. $117,100
B. $116,500
C. $115,450
D. $114,800
12. What was the median selling price of the homes sold in Fairfield Heights
in June?
A. $112,750
B. $114,800
C. $116,500
D. $117,450
13. The numbers of patients enrolled at four health clinics are 790, 1150, 662,
and 805. Which expression could be used to find the mean number of
patients per clinic?
A.
B.
C.
D.
14. What is the median value of $268, $1258, $654, $1258, $900, $1558, and
$852?
A. $1258
B. $964
C. $900
D. $852
15. What is the mode of the following points scored: 14, 17, 14, 12, 13, 15,
22, and 11?
A. 13.5

B. 14
C. 14.75
D. 16.5
Answers and explanations begin on page 668.

Lesson 5: Line Plots
The same kind of information that can be expressed in a frequency table (see
page 287) can also be expressed in a line plot. A line plot shows the
frequency of data along a number line. Study the following example.
Weekly Gym Visits

Number of Students

0

I

1

II

2

II

3

III

4

0

5

I

6

0

7

I

Key Ideas
A line plot is a graph that shows the frequency of data along a number
line.
Based on frequency tables, line plots consist of a horizontal scale and
points or x’s placed over corresponding numbers.
Line plots help us to interpret the distribution of data.
Example 1: The student health services department at a university surveyed

several students and asked them how many times per week they
visited the school’s gym. The following frequency table shows the
results for several students.
Next, the health services department decided to create a line plot in order to
see the distribution of gym visits. Each x represents a student.

GED® TEST TIP
One type of question may ask you to analyze data on a line
plot. Another type of question could ask you to use a frequency
table to place an element on a line plot.
You can see from this line plot that there is an uneven distribution, or
arrangement, of students across the numbers of possible gym visits. Three
visits per week has the highest frequency, meaning that more students go to
the gym three times per week than any other number of visits. You can also
see that the data range extends from zero visits per week to seven visits per
week—no student visits the gym more often than that. The data point
showing the one student who visits the gym seven times per week is an
outlier—that is, a data point that is distant from where most of the data is
clustered.
The Mathematical Reasoning Test may ask you to identify highest frequency,
range, and outliers, or it may give you some data and ask you to place x’s or
dots on a number line to create a line plot.
Use the following example to study these concepts further.
Example 2: Students in Ms. Jones’s class took a math test. Their scores on the
test are displayed on the line plot below. Each dot represents a

student. Which grade displayed the highest frequency?

More students received a C than received any other grade. Therefore, grade C
has the highest frequency of any grade on the line plot.
The range of grades on the math test was from D (the lowest grade received
by any student) to A (the highest grade received by any student).

Practice 5
A. For questions 1 and 2, choose the line plot that matches each
frequency table. Use choices A–D below for both questions.
1. Zoologists have counted the number of stripes on certain zebras in a
zoo. The set of data from these observations is represented by the
following frequency table:

Number of Stripes per Side

Number of Zebras with That
Many Stripes

24

I

25

0

26

II

27

0

28

II

29

0

30

II

31

0

32

I

Which line plot represents this data?

A.

B.

2. At a certain elementary school, classes may have different numbers
of students. The following frequency table represents how many
students are in the classes this year:
Number of
Students

Number of Classes with That
Many Students

24

0

25

0

26

0

27

I

28

I

29

III

30

0

31

I

32

II

Which line plot represents this data?
C.

D.

Questions 3 and 4 are based on the following information.
Juana runs a community garden. She is interested in how many different
types of vegetables garden members are planting. She collects the following
data:
Garden Member

Types of Vegetables Planted

Alberta

4

Paul

3

Eileen

6

Donato

2

Vijay

3

Janelle

2

Zara

1

Wahib

8

Bill

4

Yeo

3

3. The line plot below is based on the information in the table. Each point
represents one of the members of the community garden. Place as many
additional points as necessary to complete the line plot.

4. Which value (number of types of vegetables) has the highest frequency in
the data?

A. 2
B. 3
C. 4
D. 8
Answers and explanations begin on page 668.

Lesson 6: Histograms
Like line plots, histograms display frequencies, but they do so in a very
different way. Consider the following example:

Key Ideas
A histogram is another form of data display based on groups and counts
within a group.
Groups are plotted on the horizontal axis, and frequencies are plotted on
the vertical axis.
Example 1: Graham is a veterinarian. Last year he decided to track client appointments for spring shots. The following table and histogram
represent his results:
Week of

Number of Appointments

March 1–7

2

March 8–14

4

March 15–21

8

March 22–28

11

March 29–April 4

14

April 5–11

17

April 12–18

13

April 19–25

7

April 26–May 2

5

The histogram above on the right has two axes: a vertical axis (or y-axis)
representing numbers of appointments and a horizontal axis (also called an
x-axis) that has increments representing the weeks. The area of each bar
represents the number of appointments for that week. Thus, you can see not
only how many appointments were in any given week but also how the
frequency of appointments changed over the weeks in the chart.

Finally, histograms can also be used to show percentages. If we alter the
histogram about Graham’s appointments so that each bar represents the
percent of total appointments each week, it would look like the one on the
right.

GED® TEST TIP
Some multiple-choice questions may ask you to identify graphs
that represent different types of data collection. You may be
given some data and asked which graph represents that set of
data.
Because the percentages add up to 100%, the areas of all the bars add up to

100.
Example 2: What percent of appointments for spring shots occurred during
the first two weeks of March?
You can figure this out by adding the percentages for those weeks (you can
approximate based on the histogram): for March 1–7, about 2%; for March
8–14, about 5%. Approximately 7% of appointments for spring shots
occurred during those two weeks.

Practice 6
A. Choose the histogram that matches each frequency table. Use choices
A–D below for both questions 1 and 2.
1. Josefina runs a retail business. She posted a coupon to a social
media site from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. The table shows how many
people downloaded or printed the coupon.

Hour
Beginning With:

Number of People Who
Downloaded or Printed
Coupon:

9:00 a.m.

30

10:00 a.m.

56

11:00 a.m.

80

12:00 p.m.

71

1:00 p.m.

56

2:00 p.m.

31

3:00 p.m.

22

4:00 p.m.

14

2. Mike administered a skills assessment to his employees. Possible
scores on the skills assessment ranged from 200 to 1800. The

following table shows how his employees performed on the
assessment:
Score Range

Number of Employees

200–399

15

400–599

22

600–799

35

800–999

62

1000–1199

80

1200–1399

69

1400–1599

47

1600–1800

20

A.

B.

C.

D.

B. Choose the one best answer to each question.
Question 3 refers to the following histogram and information.
Influenza, or “flu,” season in the United States tends to last from fall
through spring.

Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

3. Approximately what percentage of flu cases was reported to the
CDC during the 2012–2013 season during the time period of
December 9 to January 5?
A. 7%
B. 15%

C. 36%
D. 50%
Answers and explanations begin on page 668.

Lesson 7: Probability
Key Ideas
Probability is a ratio. It can be expressed as a ratio, fraction, decimal, or
percent.
Theoretical probability is the ratio of favorable outcomes to possible
outcomes.
Experimental probability is the ratio of favorable outcomes to the
number of trials in an experiment.

Simple Probability
Probability tells whether something is likely or unlikely to happen. The
probability of any event can be expressed by a number from 0 to 1. If an
event has 0 probability, the event is impossible. An event with a probability
of 1 is certain to happen. Most events are somewhere in between.
To find the probability of a simple random event, we must identify favorable
and possible outcomes. A favorable outcome is the event that we are
interested in. The possible outcomes are all the possible events that could
occur. Theoretical probability (sometimes called simple probability) is the
ratio of favorable outcomes to possible outcomes.
Example 1: The spinner is divided into 8 equal sections. What is the
probability of spinning a 4 on the spinner?

1. There are two sections labeled 4 on the spinner, and there are 8
sections in all.
2. Use the probability ratio:

.

The probability of spinning a 4 on the spinner is 1 out of 4, , 0.25, or 25%.
In Example 1, probability was based on what we knew could happen.
Another type of probability, called experimental probability, is based on
what actually happens during the trials of an experiment. The number of trials
are the number of times you try the experiment.

GED® TEST TIP
In a multiple-choice probability problem, skim the answer
choices to see if they are in fraction, percent, or ratio form.
Knowing the answer form will help you decide how to do your
calculation.
Example 2: Ricardo and Scott used the same spinner to play a game.
They kept track of the numbers that they got on each spin for 20
spins. The numbers are shown below.
2, 4, 4, 6, 4, 3, 4, 6, 4, 3, 1, 6, 2, 2, 5, 2, 4, 2, 1, 2
Based on their results, what is the experimental probability of spinning a 4?

1. Ricardo and Scott spun a 4 six times out of twenty.
2. Use this ratio:

, 0.3, or 30%.

Notice that experimental probability is close to, but not necessarily equal to,
theoretical probability. Theoretical probability can tell you what will
probably happen, but it can’t predict what will actually happen.

Practice 7.1
A. Express probability as a fraction, decimal, and percent for questions 1
through 5. Do not use a calculator.
1. A game has 50 wooden tiles. Players draw tiles to spell words. If 20
of the tiles are marked with vowels, what is the probability of
drawing a vowel from the tiles?
2. A spinner has five equal sections colored either red, white, or blue.
After 40 spins, a player has the following results:
Color

Frequency

red
white
blue
What is the experimental probability of not spinning blue on the
spinner?
3. There are four red, four blue, and two green marbles in a bag. If
one marble is chosen at random from the bag, what is the
probability that the marble will be green?
4. A movie theater sells 180 adult tickets and 60 children’s tickets
to a movie. As part of a special promotion, one ticket will be
chosen at random, and the winner will receive a prize. What is
the probability that the winner will be a child?
5. A spinner has six equal sections numbered from 1 to 6. What is

the probability of spinning either a 5 or 6?
B. Choose the one best answer to each question. You MAY use your
calculator.
Questions 6 and 7 refer to the following information.
A deck of 12 cards is marked with the following symbols.

6. If a card is chosen at random, what is the probability of selecting a
diamond (♦)?
A. 6%
B. 12%
C. 50%
D. 60%
7. If a card is chosen at random, what is the probability of selecting
something other than a club (♣)?
A.
B.
C.
D.
Questions 8 and 9 refer to the following information.
Erin flipped a coin 40 times and made this table to show how many outcomes
were “heads” and how many were “tails.”

heads
tails
8. Based on Erin’s data, what is the experimental probability of getting tails
on a coin flip?
A. 3 out of 5
B. 3 out of 4
C. 2 out of 3
D. 2 out of 5
9. Based on Erin’s data, what is the experimental probability of getting
heads on a coin flip?
A. 3 out of 5
B. 3 out of 4
C. 2 out of 3
D. 1 out of 2
Answers and explanations begin on page 669.

Dependent and Independent Probability
You know how to find the probability of a single event. You can use this
knowledge to find the probability of two or more events.
Example 3: Brad tosses two quarters into the air. What is the probability that
both will land so that the heads’ sides are showing?
One way to solve the problem is to list or diagram all the possible outcomes.

There are four possible outcomes, and only one is favorable (HH). Therefore,
the probability of having both land with the heads side up is , or 25%.
You can also use multiplication to find the probability.
1. Find the probability of the individual events. The probability that one
coin will be heads is
is

, and the probability that the other will be heads

.

2. Multiply to find the probability of both events:

.

The two coin tosses in Example 3 are independent events. When events are
independent, one does not affect the probability of another. In Example 4
below, the events are dependent. Once the first event takes place, the
probability of the second event is changed.
Example 4: A box contains four blue marbles and two red marbles. If you
select two marbles, what is the probability that both will be blue?
(Hint: Even though the marbles in the box are taken out at the same time,
think of one as the first marble and the other as the second marble.)

1. There are six marbles in the box, and four are blue. The probability

that the first marble will be blue is

, which reduces to

.

2. Assume the first marble selected is blue. Now there are only five
marbles in the box, and three are blue. The probability that the second
marble will be blue is .
3. Multiply to find the probability of the two events:

, or

.

The probability that both marbles will be blue is 2 out of 5.
NOTE: The events in Example 4 would not be dependent if the first marble
were replaced before the second marble was selected. Always think carefully
about the situation to decide whether two events are dependent or
independent.

Practice 7.2
A. Solve as directed. Express answers as fractions.
1. Kim rolls two standard six-sided dice. What is the chance that both
will be 4s?
2. Ten cards are numbered from 1 to 10. Toni draws out a card,
replaces it, and then draws another card. What is the probability that
both cards will be numbers greater than 5?
3. A spinner has four equal sections. Two sections are red, one is
green, and one is blue. If the spinner is spun three times, what is the
probability that all three spins will be red?
4. Twenty marbles are placed in a bag. Ten are red, and ten are black.
One marble is drawn from the bag and set aside. Another marble is
drawn from the bag. What is the chance that both marbles will be
red?
5. Allison tosses a coin four times. What is the chance that the coin
will be heads all four times?
6. If you roll two standard dice, what is the probability that both will
be an odd number?

B. Choose the one best answer to each question. You MAY use your
calculator.
Questions 7 and 8 refer to the following information.
In a game a player rolls a die, numbered from 1 to 6, and spins a spinner.
The spinner is shown below.

7. What is the probability of rolling a 5 and then spinning an even
number?
A.
B.
C.
D.
8. What is the chance that a player will get a 3 on both the die and the
spinner?
A.
B.
C.

D.
Daniel uses the ten cards below in a magic trick.

9. Daniel shuffles the cards and asks an audience member to choose and
hold two cards. If the cards are chosen randomly, what is the chance
that both will be marked with a square?
A. 8 out of 14
B. 3 out of 5
C. 1 out of 3
D. 1 out of 5
10. There are 15 colored chips in a bag. Eight are green, and seven are
white. Five white chips are removed. What is the probability that the
next chip selected will be green?
A. 100%
B. 80%
C. 75%
D. 25%
Answers and explanations begin on page 669.

Lesson 8: Combinations

Combinations with One Type of Item
Sometimes the GED® Mathematical Reasoning Test will ask you how many
ways you can combine a set of items. Sometimes you may have only one type
of item to combine, and sometimes you may have more than one type to
combine. This difference will determine your problem-solving strategy.

Key Ideas
Combinations are used to select several things out of a larger group
when the order doesn’t matter.
If you are asked to find how many ways to combine items from one
group, use an organized list or table.
If you are asked to find how many ways to combine one item from each
of a number of different types of items, use a tree diagram or the
fundamental counting principle.
Consider an example with only one type of item:
Example 1: Pablo is going shopping at a fruit stand that sells apples, bananas,
grapes, and pears. Pablo will buy two different kinds of fruit. How
many combinations of two kinds of fruit could Pablo buy?
The question is asking you to list possible groups of two out of the overall set
of four. Notice that order doesn’t matter—that is, apples and bananas is no
different from bananas and apples. To solve this problem, you can make a
list. Start with apples and list all of the combinations that include apples:
AB, AG, AP. Then make a list of groups that start with bananas and include
the remaining fruits: BG, BP. Don’t include BA because that’s the same as
AB. Then make a list of groups that start with grapes and include only the
remaining fruits: GP. There are no remaining groups that start with P. You
may find it easier to make this list in
columns, as follows:
AB
AG BG

AP BP GP

GED® TEST TIP
While you are taking the test on computer, you can use the
provided marker and wipe-off board to make a tree diagram or
other diagrams to help you visualize problems.
There are 6 possible combinations.
You can also draw a quick table like the following. Include a column for each
of the fruits, and let each row represent a possible combination. Place two x’s
in each row to represent a combination of two fruits.
Apples

Bananas

x

x

x

Grapes

Pears

x

x

x
x

x

x

x
x

x

Notice that you could not draw any more rows with two x’s without
duplicating some of the existing rows. Count the rows: there are 6 possible
combinations of two fruits.

Practice 8.1
A. Use counting, an organized list, or a table to solve the following
problems.

1. As a supervisor, Rob is choosing four of his employees to work on a
special project. The employees are Angela, Barbara, Colin, David,
and Elizabeth. Of those five employees, how many teams of four
are possible?
2. Jessica wants to take three books on vacation with her. She has five
books to choose from. How many possible combinations of three
books could she take on vacation?
3. Grant is cooking a homemade pizza, and he has the following
toppings available: anchovies, ham, mushrooms, and sausage. He
will choose three of those toppings. How many ways could Grant
combine those toppings?
4. Five friends want to play a video game designed for two players.
How many different combinations of two friends are possible, if the
order of the friends does not matter?
B. Choose the one best answer to each question about combinations.
5. Celia is going to plant a small flower bed with four flowers. She can
choose from begonias, fuchsias, hellebore, daisies, and salvia. How
many combinations of four flowers are possible?
A. 5
B. 20
C. 24
D. 120
6. Regan owns a small business, and she wants to send three people
from her business to an upcoming trade show. Since Regan plans to
attend, she will only choose two of her four employees to also
attend. How many combinations of employees could Regan choose
to send to the trade show?
A. 4
B. 6
C. 10
D. 24
7. A book club, which has two women and three men, can send three

of its members to a book signing. How many possible combinations
of members could attend the book signing?
A. 1
B. 5
C. 10
D. 120
8. Given six people, how many combinations of three are possible if
order does not matter?
A. 20
B. 120
C. 180
D. 720
9. The Sarkesian brothers own a hardware store. There are five items
the owners might display in the window. Joe Sarkesian thinks that
the window should have two items, but his brother Rick thinks the
window should have three items. Counting both Joe’s ideas and
Rick’s ideas for the window, how many possible combinations of
items might go into the window display?
A. 10
B. 20
C. 30
D. 120
Answers and explanations begin on page 669.

Combinations with More Than One Type of Item
Sometimes you may be asked to count possible combinations with more than
one type of item. Consider the following example:
Example 2: Sarah is deciding what to wear. She has three shirts, two pairs of
pants, and two pairs of shoes. How many possible outfits does she

have, if an outfit is one shirt, one pair of pants, and one pair of shoes?
This question differs from the question about Pablo on page 300. In that
question, Pablo was choosing from one overall group of fruits. Here, Sarah is
choosing one out of each of three groups—shirts, pants, and shoes. If you are
given more than one type of item and must choose one of each type, you can
use a tree diagram to figure out all the possible combinations. Study the
following example:

Each “branch” of the tree represents a possible combination. The number of
branches on the right-hand side represents the possible number of
combinations; in this case, there are 12 possible outfits.
However, you can solve the same type of problem (where you have more
than one type of item and are choosing one of each type) using the
fundamental counting principle, which works like this:
Start with shirts: for each shirt, Sarah has two pants options. That’s
. Additionally, for each of those six options, she has two options
for shoes. That’s

.

Use the fundamental counting principle to solve the following problem:
Example 3: Gordon is at a restaurant that serves a three-course meal: an
appetizer, an entrée, and a dessert. There are three appetizers, six
entrees, and four desserts to choose from. Gordon will order one of
each. How many different meals could he order?
Multiply three appetizers by six entrees by four desserts:
There are 72 possible ways Gordon could order his meal.

.

Practice 8.2
A. Use a tree diagram or the fundamental counting principle to solve the
following problems.
1. Frank is making a sandwich. His sandwich will have one type of
bread, one type of meat, and one condiment. He has four types of
bread: white, wheat, rye, and a Kaiser roll. Meats he can choose
from are chicken, turkey, and roast beef. For condiments, Frank can
choose mayonnaise, mustard, vinaigrette, or horseradish. How many
ways can Frank make his sandwich?
2. Van Ahn attended a trivia contest and won three rounds. For the
first round she won, she could choose one of three restaurant gift
certificates. The prize for another round was one of two T-shirts.
Winning the third round allowed her to choose one of four souvenir
hats. How many possible combinations of prizes were available to
Van Ahn?
3. Henry is wrapping a gift for his daughter. He will use one type of
wrapping paper, one type of ribbon, and one bow. He has three
different types of wrapping paper, three different types of ribbon,
and three different bows. How many ways can Henry wrap the gift?
4. Julio is looking forward to a three-day weekend. On Friday, he will
either go to the beach or attend a street festival. On Saturday, he
plans to visit a museum, but he is trying to decide among three
different museums. On Sunday, he will try one of four new
restaurants. How many ways could Julio combine these weekend

activities?
B. Choose the one best answer to each question about combinations.
Determine whether you are being asked to find possible combinations
from one type of item or from multiple types of items. You MAY use
your calculator.
5. The Nu Mu Beta fraternity is deciding what secret passphrase it should
require its members to say before being admitted to meetings. The first
and third words of the passphrase will be the names of Greek letters.
There are 24 letters in the Greek alphabet. The second word will be a
number from one to nine. How many possible passphrases are there?
A. 24
B. 57
C. 576
D. 5184
6. A video game designer is creating a new superhero, who will have
three of five potential superpowers. How many combinations of
superpowers could the new superhero have?
A. 10
B. 15
C. 100
D. 125
7. A chef will make a soup with five ingredients: one of four meats, one
of four vegetables, one of four kinds of noodles, one of four kinds of
broth, and one of four spices. How many possible combinations of
ingredients could the chef put into the soup?
A. 20
B. 256
C. 1024
D. 3125
8. A doctor is deciding how to treat a given disease. The doctor will

prescribe one medication, one dietary change, and one type of vitamin
supplement. There are five medications, five dietary changes, and five
types of vitamins the doctor might prescribe. How many combinations
are possible?
A. 125
B. 625
C. 1250
D. 3125
Answers and explanations begin on page 669.

Lesson 9: Permutations
Key Ideas
Permutations are used to find the number of possible outcomes when
the order does matter.
Use the total number of people or items and the number of possible
outcomes to find the number of permutations that are possible.
On the Mathematical Reasoning Test, you may be asked how many possible
permutations, or sequences, are possible given a group of items. Consider the
following example:
Example 1: Eliza is planning her day off. She wants to visit the art museum,
try the new coffee shop, call her mom, and take a walk, but not
necessarily in that order. How many possible sequences of those four
activities are there?
This question asks you for all possible permutations, or ways to sequence the
items. Thus, coffee-art-mom-walk and art-coffee-mom-walk are two differ-ent
possible outcomes. Consider how this problem differs from the combinations
problems on pages 300–303. In those cases, order did not matter; in a
permutations problem, order does matter.

To find how many ways you can sequence all the items in a list, multiply the
possibilities like this. Start with how many things could go first: here, there
are four possibilities for Eliza’s first activity. Once she has done that first
activity, three possibilities remain. After she has done a first and second
activity, two possibilities remain, and then only one. So you simply multiply:
. There are 24 possible permutations.
Some permutations questions may ask you to determine the possible
orderings for only some of the items in a list. Consider this example:
Example 2: Ten runners are competing in a race. There are prizes for first,
second, and third place. How many possible sequences of the top
three prize winners are there?

GED® TEST TIP
When you are reading a question that suggests that you may
want to find a combination or a permutation, ask yourself, “Am
I finding a number of groups (combinations), or am I finding
the number of possible sequences (permutations)?”
Notice that you are not simply figuring out how many groups of three can be
made out of the ten. Rather, you are figuring out how many sequences of
three can be made out of the ten. That can sometimes be represented on the
GED® Test with the notation P(10, 3).
Now, multiplying
would give you
all the possible permutations of all ten runners, so that approach will not
work here. Instead, start with how many people could win first place: here,
ten. Once someone has won first, there are nine possibilities for second place.
Once someone has won first and someone else has won second, there are
eight possibilities for third place. And then you stop multiplying:
. There are 720 possible ways that the runners could be
arranged in the top three prize-winning slots. (Note that simply multiplying

10 by 3 will not work.)

Practice 9
A. Read the problems and decide whether you are being asked to find
combinations or permutations. Then solve.
1. Noemi is trying to remember the password for her email. She knows
that it has the following characters in it: M, Q, $, L, 7. But she can’t
remember the order they go in. How many possible sequences of
those five characters are there?
2. Bilal is going to the museum. She wants to see the contemporary art
exhibit, the Impressionists, the Greek vases, and a special Picasso
exhibit but not necessarily in that order. How many sequences of
those exhibits are possible?
3. Five students in a class have volunteered for a special project. Only
three can actually help with the project. How many groupings of
three out of the five are possible?
4. Tyrell is the curator at a gallery and is deciding how to arrange six
paintings that will be displayed in a line along one wall. All six
paintings will be included. How many possible sequences could
Tyrell choose?
B. Choose the one best answer to each question about combinations or
permutations. You MAY use your calculator.
5. Soraya has been given six tasks to do at work, but she has time to
complete only four of them. She must decide in what order to do the
tasks. How many possible orderings of four tasks are available to
Soraya?
A. 24
B. 36
C. 360
D. 720
6. In a certain public garden, the gardener wanted to show the different

visual effects that arranging flowers in different sequences can have.
So he chose three kinds of flowers and planted flower beds showing
each of the possible sequences of the three kinds. How many such
flower beds did the gardener plant?
A. 3
B. 6
C. 9
D. 12
7. Ten people hope to become extras in a movie. The movie’s casting
director will choose four people to fill the following specific roles in
the movie: Bystander #1, Bystander #2, Bystander #3, and Bystander
#4. How many ways could those four roles be filled?
A. 24
B. 40
C. 540
D. 5040
Questions 8 and 9 refer to the following information:
Clark and his daughter are at the amusement park, and Clark is offering
his daughter a choice. They don’t have time to ride all six rides at the
amusement park, but they can ride three of them.
8. How many combinations of three rides could Clark’s daughter
choose?
A. 18
B. 20
C. 120
D. 720
9. Clark’s daughter can also choose the order in which she wants to enjoy
the rides. How many possible orderings of three out of the six rides are
possible?

A. 18
B. 20
C. 120
D. 720
Answers and explanations begin on page 670.

Lesson 10: Compare Proportions in
Different Formats
Key Ideas
A proportion can be represented in multiple ways, but its magnitude
does not change.
It is easiest to compare the magnitude of two values if they are
represented in the same way.
The relative magnitude of two quantities can be represented in multiple
ways: as simple numbers, on a graph or chart, or as dimensions on a
blueprint or diagram. It is harder to compare two quantities when they are
presented differently—for example, when one is represented on a bar
graph and the other is represented in a table of values.
To directly compare quantities represented differently, translate them into
the same format. Typically, using a numerical representation is most
efficient for both translation and comparison purposes.
Example 1: The bar graph shows the number of accidents for men and
women aged 18–35 in Tabular County for the summer of 2014.
The following year, the county released a report that the monthly
rate of accidents for men in 2015 had been 1.6, 2.3, and 1.8 times
that of women for June, July, and August, respectively. Of the six
months reported, when was an accident victim most likely to be
male?

1. Determine the proportion of 2014 male accidents to female
accidents from the bar graph. For June, the ratio is
July

, and for August

, for

.

2. Compare the calculated and given values to determine the greatest
proportion of male to female accidents. The highest value for this
ratio is in July 2015, when men were 2.3 times as likely to have an
accident as women.

GED® TEST TIP
When a question asks you to compare two proportions
presented in different formats, convert one or both
proportions so they are in the same format. Usually,
proportions in a numerical format are easiest to compare.
Example 2: The following velocity-time graph shows the rate of
acceleration of two classic muscle cars. A newer model, the
Hermes, is able to accelerate from 0 to 60 miles per hour (mph) in
8 seconds (s).

How does the Hermes compare to the cars on the graph in terms of
acceleration?
1. Use the formula for slope of a line,

, to find the rate of

acceleration for the cars on the graph. The Pony’s acceleration is
mph/s, and the Firebat’s is

mph/s.

2. Write the rate of acceleration of the Hermes the same way, as
mph/s.
3. Compare the values to determine the relative speeds of the cars. The
Hermes is faster than the Firebat but still slower than the Pony.

Practice 10
Compare the proportional data in the following scenarios.
Question 1 is based on the following graphs.
1. The two graphs show domestic and foreign sales for a brand of US
potato chips. For which year were the foreign sales higher as a
percentage of total sales, and what was the difference in that
percentage between the years?

Question 2 is based on the following graph.

2. A second-grade political candidate, Rex Slater, predicted he would win
55 percent of the class vote. The results of the election are shown in the
bar graph. Was he correct?
Question 3 is based on the following graph.

3. Engineers at an automotive parts company are testing brakes to find out
whether their brakes beat those of their competitors, which can

decelerate the same car at a rate of 15 miles per hour (mph) per second
(s). Which statement correctly describes the results of their latest test,
shown on the graph?
A. The brakes are better than the competitors’ brakes by more than 1
mph/s.
B. The brakes are better than the competitors’ brakes by less than 1
mph/s.
C. The brakes are worse than the competitors’ brakes by less than 1
mph/s.
D. The brakes are worse than the competitors’ brakes by more than 1
mph/s.
Question 4 is based on the following chart and figure.

4. A group of psychologists are testing an ancient Greek theory about
beauty. According to this theory, the ratio of the height of the face to
the width of the face should be as close to 1.6 as possible. The chart
above shows the results for some pictures of models in magazines.
Given the face shown, determine how beautiful the person is compared
to the models.
A. The person is more beautiful than any of the models.
B. The person is more beautiful than four of the models.
C. The person is more beautiful than three of the models.
D. The person is more beautiful than two of the models.
Answers and explanations begin on page 670.

Data, Statistics, and Probability Practice

Questions
Directions: You MAY use your calculator.
Questions 1 and 2 refer to the following graph.

1. The mean number of aircraft orders for the six years shown on the
graph is 573 planes. In which year was the number of orders closest to
the mean?
A. 2006
B. 2007
C. 2008
D. 2009
2. By about what percent did orders at National Aircraft decrease from
2008 to 2009?
A. 30%
B. 40%
C. 68%
D. 75%
3. At a convention, Jim and his three friends each bought three raffle
tickets. At the time of the drawing, 400 tickets had been sold. What is
the probability that either Jim or one of his friends will win?
A.

B.
C.
D.
Questions 4 through 6 are based on the following table.
Southland Weather
March 9
Area

High Temp.

Low Temp.

Precipitation
(in inches)

Downtown

65°F

53°F

0.45

Airport

62°F

50°F

0.63

Woodland Hills

68°F

50°F

1.34

East Village

56°F

48°F

3.53

Ventura

62°F

49°F

2.57

Highland Park

64°F

55°F

0.84

4. Based on the data in the table, what was the median low temperature
for March 9?
A. 62.8°
B. 51.5°
C. 50.8°
D. 50°
5. What was the mean amount of precipitation (in inches) on March 9 for
the areas listed in the table?
A. 0.65
B. 1.09
C. 1.56
D. 1.99

6. For which area on the table was there the greatest range, or difference,
between the high and low temperatures?
A. Ventura
B. East Village
C. Woodland Hills
D. Downtown
Questions 7 and 8 refer to the graph.

7. Platinum Cinemas opened its first theaters in 2001. What was the first
year after 2001 in which the company experienced a decline in sales?
A. 2004
B. 2005
C. 2008
D. 2009
8. Which year had the sharpest increase in ticket sales over the previous
year?
A. 2002
B. 2006
C. 2008
D. 2009

9. At Nelson Stationers, the first 25 customers who visited the store on
Monday morning received their choice of a gift. The table below shows
how many customers chose each gift.
Pen and Pencil Set
Calculator
Mouse Pad
What percent of the customers chose a mouse pad?
A. 17%
B. 25%
C. 32%
D.
10. A standard deck of playing cards has 52 cards, with 13 cards each of
hearts, diamonds, clubs, and spades. If a card is drawn randomly from
the deck, what is the probability that it will be either hearts or
diamonds?
A. 1 in 2
B. 1 in 4
C. 1 in 8
D. 1 in 16
11. Nita worked the following overtime hours over a six-week period.
Week 1: 5 hours
Week 2:

hours

Week 3: 4 hours
Week 4: 0 hours

Week 5:

hours

Week 6: 7 hours
What is the mean number of overtime hours Nita worked each week?
Write your answer on the line below.
____________________________
12. A spinner has five equal sections, and they are numbered from 1 to 5.
What is the probability of spinning a number greater than 3? (Express
the answer as a fraction.)
Write your answer on the line below.
____________________________
Questions 13 through 15 refer to the following graph.
In a recent election, five candidates ran for the city council seat from District
11. The results of the race are shown in the graph below.

13. The three city council candidates who received the fewest votes
received what percent of the total vote?
A. 23%

B. 41%
C. 56%
D. 77%
14. Which two candidates combined received about

of the votes cast?

A. Reiner and Utley
B. Kang and Utley
C. Bowen and Utley
D. Lee and Bowen
15. If 5100 votes were cast in the election, which of the following
expressions could be used to find out how many votes Grace Reiner received?
A.
B.
C.
D.
Questions 16 through 18 refer to the following graph.

16. In which month did Company A and Company B receive about the
same number of online orders?
A. February
B. March
C. April
D. May
17. Based on the trends shown by the data, what would be the best
prediction for the number of online orders in July for Company A?
A. 7200
B. 5900
C. 5200
D. 4900
18. About 18 percent of the online orders in April at Company A are
returned for credit or exchange. About how many orders at Company A
were returned for credit or exchange in the month of April?
A. 180
B. 360
C. 540
D. 600
Questions 19 and 20 are based on the following information.
A basketball player’s statistics for an eight-game series are shown in the table
below.
Game

Shots Attempted

Shots Made

1

25

10

2

23

12

3

26

10

4

24

13

5

29

15

6

18

7

7

24

12

8

27

10

19. What was the median number of shots attempted by this player in the
series?
A. 24
B. 24.5
C. 25
D. 26.5
20. What is the mode of the shots made by this player during the series?
A. 12
B. 11
C. 10 and 12
D. 10
21. A bag contains 24 marbles. Eight are red, six are blue, and ten are
white. A marble is drawn from the bag and replaced. A second marble
is chosen at random from the bag. What is the probability that the first
marble is red and the second is white?
A.
B.
C.
D.
22. A company has 36 employees. For three months, the owner has kept
track of the number of sick days used by her employees per month.
Month

Sick Days

Sept.

34

Oct.

31

Nov.

42

Which expression could be used to find the average number of sick
days taken each month?
A.
B.
C.
D.
For questions 23 through 27, write your answers on the lines provided.
23. Andy rolls two standard six-sided dice. What is the probability of
rolling two 1s? Express your answer as a fraction.
____________________________
24. Kate drove 158 miles on Monday, 276 miles on Tuesday, 54 miles on
Wednesday, 305 miles on Thursday, and 210 miles on Friday. In miles,
what was the median distance she drove for the five days?
____________________________
25. Angelique, a teacher, is making a reading list for her students. She
wants to include one historical novel, one work of science fiction, one
book of poetry, and one graphic novel. She has five of each type of
book to choose from. How many possible combinations of books could
she include in her reading list?
____________________________
26. There are four children in Mr. Martin’s class. Three of them will be
selected to be hall monitors. How many combinations of hall monitors
are possible?

____________________________
27. A charity’s board has ten members. One of the members will be elected
president, then another will be elected treasurer, and then a third will be
elected secretary. If no member can hold more than one position, how
many ways can the members fill those positions?
____________________________
Questions 28 and 29 are based on the following information.
The frequency table below displays the reasons why patients visited a walk-in
clinic during a certain week.
Reason

Number of Patients

Colds and Flu

I

Cuts and Scrapes

III

Sprained Muscles

II

Tetanus Shots
Severe Headaches

II
II

28. Write your answer on the line below. What percent of the patients
represented in the table visited the walk-in clinic because of sprained
muscles?
____________________________
29. In the week represented in the table, what was the ratio of the number
of patients with colds or flu to the number of patients with severe
headaches?
A. 4:15
B. 4:3
C. 3:4
D. 1:5

Questions 30 and 31 are based on the following information and graph.
A hundred people are participating in a medical study. As a first step, the
researchers collected information about participants’ weight. The graph
below represents how many people fell into each weight category.

30. Which weight category displays the highest frequency?
A. 120–139 lbs
B. 180–199 lbs
C. 200–219 lbs
D. 260–279 lbs
31. Consider only the 100 individuals represented in the graph. Which one
of the following groups contains the most people?
A. Participants weighing 200 lbs or more
B. Participants weighing less than 200 lbs

C. Participants weighing 180–199 lbs
D. Participants weighing less than 180 lbs
Questions 32 through 34 refer to the following information and table.
The owner of a taxi company measures the gas mileage of each of the cars in
her fleet. The frequency table below shows her results.
Average Miles per Gallon

Number of Cars

15

I

20

II

25
30

I

35
32. Which of the values (average miles per gallon) displays the highest
frequency?
A. 15 miles per gallon
B. 20 miles per gallon
C. 30 miles per gallon
D. 35 miles per gallon
33. What is the ratio of the number of taxis that get 35 miles per gallon on
average to the number of taxis that get 15 miles per gallon on average?
A.
B.
C.
D.

34. The line plot below is based on the information in the table. Place
additional points on the line to accurately represent the data.

35. Ahmed works at the ticket window of a theater, and one night he
decides to track when the patrons arrive for a 7:30 p.m. show. The
table below represents his data.
Time period

Percent of Patrons who Arrive

5:30 to 5:59 p.m.

2%

6:00 to 6:29 p.m.

14%

6:30 to 6:59 p.m.

25%

7:00 to 7:29 p.m.

48%

7:30 to 8:00 p.m.

11%

Which one of the histograms below accurately represents Ahmed’s
data?

CHAPTER 5

Algebra Basics, Expressions, and
Polynomials
Lesson 1: The Number Line and Signed
Numbers
Key Ideas
To add numbers with like signs, add and keep the same sign.
To add numbers with unlike signs, find the difference and use the
sign from the larger number.
To subtract signed numbers, change the operation to addition and
change the sign of the number you are subtracting.

Understanding Signed Numbers
Signed numbers include zero, all positive numbers, and all negative
numbers. Zero is neither positive nor negative. On a number line, the positive

numbers are shown to the right of zero, and the negative numbers are shown
to the left.

A positive number may be written with a plus (+) symbol. If a number has no
symbol at all, we assume that it is positive. A negative number must be
preceded by a minus (−) symbol.
A signed number provides two important facts. The sign tells the direction
from zero, and the number tells you the distance from zero. For example, −5
lies five spaces to the left of zero, and +4 lies four spaces to the right of zero.

Adding and Subtracting Signed Numbers
You can use a number line to model the addition of signed numbers.
Examples: 1 + (−4) = −3 Begin at + 1; move 4 in a negative direction (left).

GED® TEST TIP
You can use the “change sign” key (−) at the bottom of the
online calculator. This changes a positive to a negative

number, and vice versa.
To add without a number line, follow these steps:
If numbers have like signs, add the numbers and keep the same sign.
If the numbers have unlike signs, find the difference between the two
numbers and use the sign of the larger number.
Example 1: Add 15 + (−25).
1. Since the numbers have unlike signs, subtract: 25 − 15 = 10.
2. Use the sign from the larger number: 15 + (−25) = −10.
Subtraction is the opposite of addition. To rewrite a subtraction problem as an
addition problem, change the operation symbol to addition and change the
sign on the number you are subtracting. Then apply the rules for adding
signed numbers.
Example 2: Subtract 3 − 8.
1. Change the operation symbol and the sign of the number you are
subtracting:
3 − 8 becomes 3 + (−8).
2. Add: 3 + (−8) = 5.
You can use the same rules to combine several signed numbers.
Example 3: (−5) + 6 − 4 − (−2)=?
1. Rewrite each subtraction as addition: (−5) + 6 + (−4) + 2.
2. Add the positive terms: 6 + 2 = 8. Add the negative terms: −5 + (−4)=
−9.
3. Combine the results: 8 + (−9) = −1.

Practice 1.1

A. Solve.
1. 8 + (−3)
2. 50 − 5
3. 11 − (−2)
4. −1 + 2
5. −4 − (−5)
6. 8 − (−2)
7. 6 − 9
8. 2 + 11
9. (−7)−(−3)
10. (−4)+6
11. −15+(−7)
12. 36−4
13. −60−(−10)
14. –5−6
15. 12+13
16. −55+ 20
17. 7 +(−3)+(−5)−10
18. 66+(−22)−33
19. −14−(−6)+18
20. 80−(−15)−20
21. 6−(−3)+(−5)+ 8
22. −23+(−11)−(−15)+21
23. 3+ 9−5+12−9−11
24. −7−20−(−14)
B. Choose the one best answer to each question.
Question 25 refers to the following number line.

25. The number line above shows which of the following expressions?
A. 2 + (−3)
B. 2 + (−5)

C. −3 + 2
D. −3 − (+2)
26. At noon, the temperature in the high desert was 92°F. A scientist
observed the following temperature changes over the course of the
next two hours: +12°F, –5°F, +6°F, –3°F, and +13°F. What was the
temperature, in degrees Fahrenheit at the end of the two-hour period?
A. 95°F
B. 103°F
C. 115°F
D. 131°F
Answers and explanations begin on page 671.

Multiplying and Dividing Signed Numbers
In algebra, multiplication is not shown using the times sign (×) because the
symbol could be easily mistaken for the variable x. Instead, multiplication is
shown using a dot or by placing two numbers next to each other. To avoid
confusion, one or both of the numbers may be enclosed in parentheses. For
example, the expressions −5.6 and −5(6) and (−5)(6) all mean “−5 times 6.”
In algebra, division can be written with the ÷ symbol, but it is usually shown
with a line that means “divided by.” The expression

means “20 divided

by −5,” as does 20/−5.
When multiplying or dividing signed numbers, use the following rules:
If the signs are the same, the answer is positive.
If the signs are different, the answer is negative.
Example 1: Multiply 4(−25).
1. Multiply the numbers only: 4 × 25 = 100.

2. Determine the sign. Since the signs on the numbers are different, the
answer is negative: 4(−25) = −100.

Example 2: Divide

.

1. Divide the numbers only: 160÷ 8 = 20.
2. Determine the sign. Since the signs on the numbers are the same, the
answer is positive:

.

A problem may contain more than two factors. Remember that each pair of
negative factors will equal a positive product. Therefore, if there is an even
number of negative terms, the product will be positive. If there is an odd
number of negative terms, the product will be negative.
Example 3: (−5)(6)(−1)(−2)(2) = ?
1. Multiply: 5 × 6 × 1 × 2 × 2 = 120.
2. There are three negative terms. Since 3 is an odd number, the product
is negative: −120.
When a problem contains more than one operation, follow this order of
operations. Do multiplication and division operations first, working from left
to right. Do addition and subtraction operations last, also working from left to
right. If a problem contains division presented with a division bar, do any
operations above and below the bar first and then divide.
Example 4:

1. Multiply:

.

2. Do the operation above the fraction bar:

.

3. Divide: −24 − (+3).
4. Subtract: −24 − (+3) = −24 + (−3) = −27.
NOTE: Notice how parentheses clarify meaning: 4 − 5 means “four minus
five,” but 4(−5) means “four times negative five.”

Practice 1.2
A. Solve. You MAY NOT use a calculator.
1. (5)(4)
2. (7)(−3)
3. (−8)(6)
4. (−2)(−9)
5. (−10)(1)
6. 9 ÷ 3
7. 12÷(−4)
8. −25 ÷ 5
9. (−18)÷(−9)
10.
11. (14)(−2)
12. (−75) ÷ 25
13. 13 ÷ (−13)
14. (−5)(15)
15.

B. Solve. You MAY use a calculator.

16.
17. (−3)(−5)(2)(−10)
18. 20÷(−5)÷(−2)
19.
20. (−11)(2)(−5)(6)
21. (12)(−2)÷(−2)
22. (−4)(−6)(−5)
23. 50÷(2)(−5)
24. (−1)(2)(−3)(2)(−1)
25.
26.
27. (−5)(−2)(0)(−1)
C. Choose the one best answer to each question.
28. Janice is creating a computer spreadsheet. A portion of her work is
shown below.
A

B

C

1

−3

4

7

2

2

−5

−8

3

−1

3

−2

Using the information from the spreadsheet, what is the value of the
expression A1*C1*A3/(B3*A3)? (Note: In a spreadsheet, the symbol
* means multiplication.)
A. −21
B. −7

C.
D. 21
29. The product of 2 and 8 is divided by −8. Which of the following
expressions could be used to find the value of the statement?

A.
B.
C.
D.
30. Which of the following is a true statement about the value of the
expression (52)(−103)(−45)(−8)(3)?
A. The result is a fraction.
B. The result is greater than 1.
C. The result is a negative number.
D. The result is a positive number.
Answers and explanations begin on page 671.

Lesson 2: Powers and Roots
Powers are a special way to show repeated multiplication. For example,
suppose you needed to multiply 5 × 5 × 5 × 5. This series of operations can
be expressed as “five to the fourth power.” In other words, the number 5
appears in the multiplication problem four times.

Key Ideas
In the expression 23, the base is 2 and the exponent is 3.
To raise a number to a certain exponent, write the base the number of
times shown by the exponent and then multiply.
To find a square root, think, “What number times itself equals this
number?”

We can write the operations algebraically using exponents. In the expression
5 × 5 × 5 × 5 above, the number 5 is the base. The exponent, a small number
written above and to the right of the base, tells how many times the base is
repeated: 5 × 5 × 5 × 5 = 54.
To evaluate an expression, perform the multiplication indicated by the exponent.
Example 1: Find the value of 25.
Write the base the number of times indicated by the exponent and then
multiply:
25 = 2 × 2 × 2 × 2 × 2 = 32.
You may encounter some special uses of exponents on the Mathematical
Reasoning Test. An exponent can be any positive number, or it can be 0, 1, or
a negative number. Memorize the situations described below.
1. A number raised to the first power equals itself: 81 = 8.
2. A number other than zero raised to the power of zero equals 1: 60 = 1.
3. A number raised to a negative exponent is equal to a fraction with a
numerator of 1:

.

GED® TEST TIP

Make a list of common square roots by squaring the numbers
from 1 to 15. Memorize them. You will need to know common
square roots to solve geometry problems about area and right
triangles.
You can use a calculator to raise numbers to any power. Use the

or

key.

Example 2: Find the square of 24.
Press: 24

. The right side of the display reads 576.

The square of 24 is 576.
Example 3: Find the value of 94.
Enter the base, press
Press 9 4

, and enter the exponent. Then press

.

. The right side of the display reads 6561.

Nine raised to the fourth power is 6561.
NOTE: To raise a negative number to a power using the TI-30XS
MultiView™ calculator, you must enter that number in parentheses:
.
To square a number, multiply the number by itself. For example, 62 = 6 × 6 =
36. In the expression 6 × 6 = 36, the number 36 is the square, and the number
6 is the square root of 36.
The symbol for square root is

. To find a square root, think, “What

number multiplied by itself is equal to the number in the bracket?”
Example 4: Find the value of

.

You know that 12 × 12, so the square root of 144 is 12.
Although (−12) × (−12) also equals 144, you will only be expected to find

positive roots on the GED® Test.
You may have to approximate the value of a square root.
Example 5: What is the square root of 90?
You know that 9 × 9 = 81 and 10 × 10 = 100. Therefore, the square root of 90
is between 9 and 10.
You can also use your calculator to find a square root. On the TI-30SX
MultiView™, you must first press the
key to access the square root
function. The

function is directly above the

calculators may not require the use of the

key. (Other

key.)

Example 6: Use your calculator to find

to the nearest tenth.

On the TI-30SX MultiView™, press

. The right side of the

display reads

.

Press the toggle key, ◀ ▶, to change the format of the answer into a decimal
The right side of the display now reads 9.486832981.

Rounding to the tenths place,

.

Practice 2
A. Solve each expression. You MAY NOT use a calculator.
1. 32
2. 41

3.
4. 250
5. (−3)2
6.
7. 53
8. 4−2
9. 24
10.
11. 10−3
12.
B. Solve each expression below. You MAY use your calculator. Round
your answer to the nearest tenth.
13. 38
14. (−6)−4
15.
16. 203
17. 115
18. (−4)−2
19.
20. (3.3)2
21.
22.

23. 1120
24. (−2)8
C. Choose the one best answer to each question.
25. The cube shown below measures 6 inches on each side. You can find
the volume of the cube by multiplying length × width × height. Which
of the following expressions represents the volume of the cube, in
cubic inches?

A. 61
B. 62
C. 63
D. 66
26. Which of the following expressions has the least value?
A. 3−3
B. 40
C. 41
D. 2−4
Answers and explanations begin on page 672.

Lesson 3: Scientific Notation

Scientific notation uses the powers of ten to express very small and very
large numbers. In scientific notation, a decimal number (greater than or equal
to 1 and less than 10) is multiplied by a power of ten.

Key Ideas
In scientific notation, a number equal to or greater than 1 and less
than 10 is multiplied by a power of ten.
Very small numbers are expressed by multiplying by a negative
power of ten.
In scientific notation, the number with the greatest power of ten has
the greatest value.

Look for patterns as you review these powers of ten.

Did you find the patterns? In the row with positive exponents, the exponent is
the same as the number of zeros in the number written in standard form. In
the row with negative exponents, the exponent is the same as the number of
decimal places in the number.
You can use these patterns to change scientific notation to standard form.

GED® TEST TIP
Always try to save time. Suppose the multiple-choice answers
are written in scientific notation. Instead of changing each
choice to standard notation, change your answer to scientific
notation.

You may be asked to compare numbers in scientific notation.
Example 5: Which is greater: 4.5 × 103 or 9.8 × 104
You don’t need to change the numbers to standard notation. Simply consider
the powers of ten. Multiplying by 104, or 10,000, must have a greater result
than multiplying by 103, which equals 1,000. In scientific notation, the
number with the greater power of 10 has the greater value. Therefore, 9.8 ×
104 is greater than 4.5 × 103.

Practice 3
A. Write each number in scientific notation.
1. 2300
2. 0.00042
3. 12,400,000
4. 14,320,000,000
5. 36,000,000
6. 0.0095
7. 0.00000058
8. 150,000,000,000
9. 0.000000009
B. Convert from scientific notation to standard notation.
10. 5.173 × 10-4
11. 3.7 × 106
12. 4.8 × 108
13. 1.7 × 10−5
14. 7.2 × 10−3
15. 9.16 × 105
16. 8.591 × 107
17. 9.56 × 10−6
C. Answer the following questions.

18. Many domestic satellites maintain an orbit approximately 23,500
miles above Earth. What is that distance, in miles, in scientific
notation?
19. Modern technology measures very fast transactions in nanoseconds.
One nanosecond equals 1.0 × 10−9 of a second. How many seconds is
a nanosecond, in standard notation?
20. The average distance of Neptune from Earth is 2.67 × 109 miles. Write
the distance, in miles, in standard notation.
21. Light in the vacuum of space travels at a speed of nearly 300 million
meters per second. Write the speed, in meters, in scientific notation.
D. Choose the one best answer to each question.
Questions 22 and 23 refer to the following table.
Unit U.S.
Metric
Equivalent Equivalent
1 ton 2,000 lb
0.907
metric ton
1
43,560 sq ft 4,047
acre
square m
22. What is the number of square feet in an acre, written in scientific
notation?
A. 0.4356 × 106
B. 4.356 × 104
C. 4.356 × 103
D. 43.56 × 103
23. A shipment of goods weighs 5 tons. Which of the following
expressions could be used to express the weight in metric tons?
A. 5 × 0.907 × 10−1
B. 5 × 9.07 × 101
C. 5 × 9.07 × 10−2
D. 5 × 9.07 × 10−1

Answers and explanations begin on page 672.

Lesson 4: Order of Operations
When a mathematical expression contains more than one operation, its value
may depend upon the order in which the operations are performed. To avoid
confusion, mathematicians have agreed to perform operations in a certain
order.

Key Ideas
To evaluate an expression correctly, you must follow the order of
operations.
If an expression uses more than one set of grouping symbols, start
with the inside set and work to the outside.
The division bar may be used as a grouping symbol.

The Order of Operations
1. Parentheses or any other grouping symbols that enclose operations
2. Exponents and roots
3. Multiplication and division, working from left to right
4. Addition and subtraction, working from left to right
Study the following example to see how to apply the order of operations.
Notice that parentheses are used in two places in the expression; however,
only the first set of parentheses encloses an operation.
Example 1: Evaluate the expression

1. Perform the addition operation in parentheses.

.

2. Raise 8 to the second power.

3. Divide, then multiply.
16 + (−3)
4. Add.
13

GED® TEST TIP
You can use the parentheses keys on your online calculator to
help you follow the order of operations.

The value of the expression

is 13.

In more complicated expressions, one set of grouping symbols may be nested
within another set. To avoid confusion, you can also use brackets [ ] or braces
{ } to group operations. To evaluate an expression with more than one set of
grouping symbols, work from the inside to the outside.
Example 2: Evaluate the expression 4[5(−4 + 3) + 2].
1. Perform the operation in the inner set of grouping symbols: (−4 + 3).

4[5(−4 + 3)−2]
4[5(−1) + 2]
2. Do the operations inside the brackets. Since multiplication comes
before addition in the order of operations, multiply 5 and −1 and then
add 2.
4[−5 + 2]
4[−3]
3. Multiply 4 and −3.
−12
The division bar (also called a fraction bar) is also a grouping symbol. Before
you divide, perform any operations shown above and below the bar.

Example 3: Evaluate the expression

.

1. Perform the operations above and below the fraction bar.

2. Divide, then add.
4 + 6 = 10

Practice 4
A. Find the value of each expression. You MAY NOT use a calculator.
1. 4 (3) − 2 + (6 + 4⋅2)

2. 16 ÷ (10 − 6)2
3. 52 −(5−7)(2)
4. 3(−3) + (7 + 4)
5.

6.
7. 23 + (8 − 5)2 − 3
8. (4 − 12)(−6) + (10 − 3)
9. 30 ÷ 3(5 − 4)
10. 15 + (4)(3)−22
11. (4 + 2)2 +(7 −2)3
12. 72 ÷ (11− 4) + (9 + 14)
13.
14. (52 + 6 − 3) ÷ (16−32)
15.
B. Choose the one best answer to each question.
Question 16 refers to the following information.
Susan is in charge of planning Midvale Hospital’s parent education
classes. She uses the table below to determine the cost of each class to the
hospital.
Midvale Hospital Parenting Workshops
Type of Workshop

Cost per
Participant

Childbirth Classes

$35 per couple

Infant Care

$30 per person

Teaching Your
Child to Read

$60 per person

16. A local foundation has offered to pay 75 percent of the cost of infant
care classes. The hospital will cover any remaining costs. There are 28
parents enrolled in the upcoming class. Which of the following
expressions could be used to find the amount, in dollars, the hospital
will pay?
A. (75)(28)(30)
B. (28)(30) − (0.75)(30)
C. (1 − 0.75)(28)(30)
D. (1 − 0.75)(30) + 28
17. In the expression
,
what is the last operation you should perform to find the value of the expression?
A. Subtract 2 from 6.
B. Add 5.
C. Multiply by 2.
D. Find the square of 10.
18. Find the value of the expression 22 + 6[(14 − 5) ÷ 3(17 − 14)].
A. 2.73
B. 28
C. 76
D. 97
Answers and explanations begin on page 672.

Lesson 5: Absolute Value
The absolute value of a number is its distance from zero on the number line.
For example, the absolute value of 5 is 5, since 5 is five spaces away from
zero on the number line. But the absolute value of −5 is also 5, since −5 is
also five spaces away from zero on the number line. Because distance is
always positive, the absolute value of any positive or negative number is
always positive.

Key Ideas
The magnitude of a number, without a sign, is called the absolute
value.
Absolute value is used to determine distance of a positive or negative
number from zero.
In the order of operations, absolute value is treated the same as a set
of parentheses.

Absolute value is written as two straight lines around a number, like this: |−5|.

Example 1: Which of the following is equal to |−13|?
(1) 13
(2) −13
The correct answer is (1). Absolute value is always positive.
Treat the absolute value sign as you would treat parentheses in the order of
operations. If numbers inside the absolute value sign are being added,
subtracted, multiplied, or divided, then do that operation before you do
anything else.
Example 2: Which of the following is equal to −20|17−34|?

(1) 340
(2) −340

GED® TEST TIP
A signed number, positive or negative, is used to show its
direction in relation to zero. However, when you see a number
inside two straight lines, you are working with its distance from
zero—which is always positive.
The correct answer is (2). First perform the subtraction within the absolute
value sign. Because you first found the absolute value, change −17 to 17.
Then multiply by −20, like this:
−20|17 − 34| = −20|−17| = −20(17) = −340.
We often think in terms of absolute value in real life, though we might
not bother to call it that. For example, imagine that you have $314 in
a checking account but you write a check for $400. You’ve overdrawn your
account by $86. The bank will record your balance as –$86.00. But you’ll
think, “I’m $86 short.” You’ll just think of the absolute value, or magnitude,
of the overdraft, without the negative sign.

Practice 5
A. Find the absolute values.
1. |18|
2. |−107|
3. |423|
4. |95|
5. |−7026|
6. |−18|

7. |−5,708, 432|
8. |−85.6|
9. |42|
10. |10.5|
11. |−163.24|
12. |−3.14|
B. Use absolute value to find the solutions.
13. 5 + |−6|
14. −3|52|
15. 3|−52|
16. 12 ÷ |−4|
17. −|110−201|
18. −14 + |−28÷ 2|
19. 706.2−|−86.4+ 0.2|
20. 49÷(−|−7|)
21. −5|−4|
22. |−6|−|−7|
23. |17|÷|−8|
24. |−5.5|×(−2)
C. Choose the one best answer to each question.
25. The temperature in Northville at 9:00 p.m. was −5°F. By 5:00 a.m. the
following morning, the temperature was −15°F. By how many degrees
did the temperature change?
A. −15 degrees
B. −5 degrees
C. 5 degrees
D. 10 degrees
26. Bob has errands to run. He walks 5 blocks east from his apartment to
the barber shop, then walks 6 blocks west to the grocery store, then
walks another 2 blocks west to the post office, and finally walks back
home. Assuming that Bob’s apartment, the barber shop, the grocery
store, and the post office are all located on the same street, how many

blocks did Bob walk in completing his errands?
A. 6
B. 11
C. 13
D. 16
27. Milania has a score of −65 points, and Chris has a score of 55 points.
By how many points is Milania losing to Chris?
A. 55
B. 65
C. 120
D. 150
28. Absolute error is the absolute value of the difference between an actual
value and its measurement. A deli scale gives a measurement of 25
ounces for a cut of meat that actually weighs only 23.5 ounces. What
is the absolute error, in ounces, of the deli scale in this instance?
A. 1.5
B. 23.5
C. 25
D. 48.5
Answers and explanations begin on page 672.

Lesson 6: Algebraic Expressions
Writing Algebraic Expressions
An algebraic expression uses numbers, operations, and variables to show
number relationships. Variables are letters (such as x and y) that represent
unknown numbers. Each time a letter is used within the same expression, it
represents the same number.

To solve algebra problems, you will need to be able to translate number
relationships described in words into algebraic expressions. Study the
following examples.

Key Ideas
Algebraic expressions show mathematical relationships using
numbers, symbols, and variables.
Variables are letters that take the place of unknown numbers.

Algebraic Expressions in Words

In Symbols

the product of 5 and a number

5x

a number decreased by 12

x − 12

the sum of 3 and the square of a
number

3 + x2

6 less than the quotient of a number
and 2
one-half a number increased by 15
4 times the difference of −3 and a
number

4(−3-x)

a number less another number

x−y

10 less the square root of the sum of
a number and 3
To do well on algebra questions on the GED® Mathematical Reasoning Test,
you must be able to translate a common life situation into mathematical
symbols. You will use this skill to write equations and functions, to apply
formulas, and to solve word problems.

GED® TEST TIP
To check whether the expression you have chosen is correct,
substitute easy numbers into the expression and complete the
operations. Then see if the result is reasonable for the
situation.
Example 1: Kyle processes sales for an online bookstore. The shipping and
handling on an order is equal to 4 percent of the total cost of the order
plus $0.95 per book. If c represents total cost, in dollars, and n
represents the number of books in an order, which of the following
expressions could be used to find the shipping and handling for an
order?
(1)
(2) (0.04 + 0.95)n + c
(3) 0.04c + 0.95n
This kind of problem is called a setup problem. You need to recognize the
correct way to find the shipping and handling based on the total cost and
number of items. The relationship is described in the second sentence.

The correct answer is option (3), 0.04c + 0.95n.

Practice 6.1
A. Write an algebraic expression for each description. Use the variables
x and y.

1. a number decreased by 7
2. the product of 3 and the square of a number is increased by that
number
3. the product of 8 and a number is decreased by 10
4. the difference of −3 multiplied by a number and the product of 2 and
another number
5. 5 less than the quotient of 10 and a number
6. the sum of −8 and the product of 7 and a number
7. the sum of 16 times a number and the number is decreased by 3 times
another number
8. a number squared plus the number raised to the fourth power
9. the square of a number plus the quotient of 4 and 7
10. 6 subtracted from the sum of 15 and the square root of a number
11. a number less the sum of another number and 13
12. the square of the sum of a number and 6
13. 17 less the sum of 2 times a number plus another number
14. a number increased by the quotient of 24 and the number
15. the difference of the product of 2 and a number and 15
16. 4 times the difference of two different numbers
17. 5 multiplied by the difference of a number squared and 3
18. the product of a number and the difference of 11 and the square root of
100
B. Choose the one best answer to each question.
19. A minor-league baseball team is giving a local charity the sum of
$1500 and $0.50 for each ticket over 2000 sold for one game. Let x
represent the number of tickets sold. If the team sells more than 2000
tickets, which of the following expressions could be used to find the
amount of the donation?
A. $1500 + $0.50x
B. $1500 + $0.50(2000 − x)
C. $1500 + $0.50(x − 2000)
D. $1500(2000 − x)($0.50)
20. The sum of 3 times a number and 4 times a second number is divided
by the sum of 2 and a third number. Which of the following

expressions represents this series of operations?
A. (3x + 4y) ÷ (2 + x)
B. 3x + 4y ÷ (2 + z)
C. 3x + 4y ÷ 2 + x
D. (3x + 4y) ÷ 2z
Question 21 refers to the following information.
Appliance City employees earn an hourly wage plus commission. Wage
options are shown below.

Option

Hourly
Wage

Commission on
Sales

A

$7.50

1%

B

$6.00

3%

21. Chandra is paid under Option B. If h represents the number of hours
worked and s represents Chandra’s total sales, in dollars, which of the
following expressions could be used to find her weekly pay?
A. 6 + h + 0.03s
B. 6h + 0.03s
C. 6s + 0.03h
D. 0.03(h)(s)
Answers and explanations begin on page 672.

Simplifying and Evaluating Expressions
Simplifying an expression means to perform all the operations you can
within an expression. When working with variables, you must remember an
important rule: you can add or subtract like terms only.
A term is a number, a variable, or the product or quotient of numbers and

variables. A term cannot include a sum or a difference.

Examples:

Like terms have the same variable raised to the same power. For example,
3x2 and 5x2 are like terms. 8y and 4y are also like terms. However, 6x and 2x2
are not like terms because the variables are not raised to the same power.
To simplify an expression, combine like terms.
Example 2: Simplify 2x − 5 + 4x2 − 8 + 6x.

Combine like terms. It is customary to write the term with the greatest
exponent first and to continue in descending order.
The distributive property allows you to remove grouping symbols to
simplify expressions. We can state the distributive property using symbols.

In other words, each term inside the parentheses is multiplied by the term
outside the parentheses, and the results are added or subtracted depending on
the operation inside the parentheses. Example 3 applies the distributive
property.
Example 3: Simplify 4x − 3(x + 9) + 15.
1. Change subtracting to adding a negative number.
2. Use the distributive property. Multiply −3 by each term in the

parentheses.
3. Combine like terms.
(NOTE: 1x means x.)

Evaluating an expression means finding its value. To evaluate an expression,
substitute a given number for each variable. Follow the order of operations.
Example 3: Find the value of the expression

when x = 6 and y

= 5.
1. Replace the variables with the values given in the problem.

2. Perform the operations above the fraction bar. Then divide.

NOTE: To remove parentheses from an operation that follows a minus sign,
imagine that the parentheses are preceded by 1. Then use the distributive
property.

Practice 6.2
A. Simplify.
1. 5 + x2 − 3 + 3x
2. 2y + 5 + 17y + 8
3. 3x − 6(x−9)
4. 6x3 + 4 + 2x2 (15) + x2
5. 4(y + 8) + 3(y −6)
6. 5 − (x − 3) + 4x
7. 16x + 6(x − 2)
8. 5y2 + 4 − 3y2 + 5 + y
9. −3(x + 3) − 2(x + 4)
10. 5x −(x + 4) −3
B. Evaluate each expression as directed.
11. Find the value of 6(x + 2) + 7 when x = 2.
12. Find the value of 3x2 + 3(x + 4) when x = 3.
13. Find the value of

when x = 2 and y = 4.

14. Find the value of y2 + 16 − (y − 5)2 when y = 3.
15. Find the value of 8x + 9y − (2x + y) when x = 4 and y = 6.
16. Find the value of x2 + 3y − 4 + 2(x − z) when x = 77, y = 5, and x = −3.
17. Find the value of
when x = 9.
18. Find the value of
when x = −2 and y = 3.
19. Find the value of x2 −(x3 + 3) when x = −2.

20. Find the value of 30x + 2 + 2y2 −3(x − 2)2 when x = 1 and y = 4.
C. Choose the one best answer to each question.
21. Which of the following expressions is equal to 3x2 + 3(x − 3) + x + 10?
A. x2 + 9x + 1
B. 3x2 + 4x + 19
C. 3x2 − 2x + 19
D. 3x2 + 4x + 1
22. Given the expression 4x2 −3(y + 6),, which of the following values for
x and y will result in a value of −11?
A. x = 2, y = 3
B. x = −2, y = 4
C. x = −1, y = 2
D. x = 1, y = 0
Question 23 refers to the following information.
Temperature Conversion Formulas
To convert
Fahrenheit (F) to
Celsius (C)
To convert Celsius
(C) to Fahrenheit (F)
23. If the temperature is 68° Fahrenheit, what is the temperature in
Celsius?
A. 20°
B. 36°
C. 154.4°
D. 180°

Answers and explanations begin on page 672.

Factors and Multiples
Key Ideas
The prime factorization of an integer is the prime numbers that can be
multiplied together to equal that integer.
The greatest common factor of two integers is the largest integer that
will divide evenly into both.
The least common multiple of two integers is the smallest number
that both integers will divide evenly into.

When you multiply two numbers to create a product, the numbers you
multiply are factors. The pairs of factors that can be multiplied to produce a
whole number can be easily listed in a T-chart.
Example 1: What are all the factors of 10?
1. Make a T-chart:

2. Count the factors in the T-chart. The number 10 has eight distinct
factors. In order from least to greatest, they are −10, −5, −2, −1, 1, 2, 5,
10.

Prime numbers are positive whole numbers with only two positive factors, 1
and the number itself. Examples of prime numbers are 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, and 13.
(Note that 1 is not a prime number.)
For example, 10 is not a prime number because, as just discovered, it has four
positive factors: 1, 2, 5, and 10. However, the numbers 2 and 5 are prime
numbers. The only positive factors of 2 are 1 and 2, and the only positive
factors of 5 are 1 and 5. Thus, the prime factorization of 10 is 2 × 5. A
number’s prime factorization may include more than two factors, as in the
next example.
Example 2: What is the prime factorization of 12?
1. Break 12 into its prime factors.
12 = 4 × 3 = 2 × 2 × 3

GED® TEST TIP
When you need to add or subtract fractions with different
denominators and the denominators are large, instead of
multiplying the denominators to find a common denominator,
use prime factorization to find their least common multiple.
Prime factors can be used to find two values that may be useful in
simplifying expressions and solving equations.
The greatest common factor (GCF) of two integers is the largest number
that divides evenly into both integers. To find the GCF, break down both
integers into their prime factorizations, find the prime factors they have in
common, and multiply those prime factors. This is handy when using the
distributive property to rewrite two or more terms as one.
Example 3: What is the greatest common factor of 40 and 140?
1. Identify the prime factors of each number.
40 = 4 × 10 = (2 × 2) × (2 × 5) = 2 × 2 × 2 × 5

140 = 10 × 14 = (2 × 5) × (2 × 7) = 2 × 2 × 5 × 7
2. See what prime factors the two numbers have in common.
Both integers share two 2s and one 5.
3. Multiply these common factors.
The greatest common factor is 2 × 2 × 5 = 20. This is the largest number that
divides evenly into both 40 and 140. Note that you could rewrite the
expression 40 + 140 as 20(2 + 7).
The least common multiple (LCM) of two integers is the smallest number
that both integers divide into. To find the LCM, break down both integers
into their prime factorizations, select each prime factor the most times it
occurs, and multiply all of the prime factors you have selected.
Example 4: What is the least common multiple of 20 and 30?
1. Identify the prime factors of each number
20 = 2 × 2 × 5 30 = 2 × 3 × 5
2. Select each factor the most times it occurs. The factor 2 appears twice
in 20, so select 2 × 2. The factor 3 appears once in 30, so select 3. And
the factor 5 appears once in both 20 and 30, so select it once.
3. Multiply these factors.
The least common multiple is 2 × 2 × 3 × 5 = 60. This is the smallest number
that both 20 and 30 will divide into. Note that if you needed to solve
, you could use a common denominator of 60:
.

Practice 6.3
A. Find the prime factorization of the following numbers.
1. 6
2. 21

3. 36
4. 54
5. 70
B. For each pair of numbers below, find the greatest common factor and
the least common multiple.
6. 6, 9
7. 45, 75
8. 50, 125
C. Solve.
9. 30 + 75 =
A. 5(3 + 7)
B. 10(6 + 5)
C. 15(2 + 5)
D. 150(5 + 2)
10.

A.

B.

C.

D.

Answers and explanations begin on page 673.

Lesson 7: Expressions and Calculator Skills
Key Ideas
ON THE Mathematical Reasoning Test, YOU WILL USE A SCIENTIFIC
CALCULATOR THAT FOLLOWS THE ORDER OF OPERATIONS.
USE THE change sign KEY TO ENTER A NEGATIVE NUMBER.
USE THE grouping symbol KEYS TO CHANGE THE ORDER OF OPERATIONS.

When you take the GED® Mathematical Reasoning Test, you may use either
a handheld or an online version of a scientific calculator (TI-30XS
MultiView™) to use on the second part of the test items. This calculator, like
most scientific calculators, uses algebraic logic, which means that it follows
the order of operations that you saw on page 324.
You need to practice using a scientific calculator with algebraic logic. You
can find out whether your calculator uses algebraic logic by running this
simple test.
Press:
enter button.)

. (Your calculator may have an equal sign instead of an

If the display reads 36, your calculator uses algebraic logic.
If the display reads 144, your calculator does not use algebraic logic.You

should find another calculator to practice for the Mathematical Reasoning
Test.
You can use a calculator to evaluate an expression that contains several
operations.
Example 1: Find the value of the expression 2x2 + 3x − 5 when x = x4.
When you come to the variable x, enter −4 by pressing
called the change sign key.

4. The

key is

Press:
The right side of the display reads 15.
The value of the expression is 15.

GED® TEST TIP
To check your work when using a calculator, enter each
calculation twice. If the results are the same, you probably
pressed the keys that you intended.
Expressions sometimes contain grouping symbols to show a different order
of operations. You can enter grouping symbols on a scientific calculator. On
the TI-30XS MultiView™, the grouping symbols and are found above
the and , respectively. When you enter the left, or open, parenthesis,
the calculator waits until you enter the right, or closing, parenthesis, , before
it calculates what is inside the parentheses.
Example 2: Find the value of the expression
Press:
The right side of the display reads 30.

when x = 4.

The value of the expression is 30.
You can also use your calculator for only part of an expression.
when x = 4.

Example 3: Find the value of the expression

Substitute 4 for x in the first part of the expression and calculate the results by
hand or using your calculator:

.

Now use your calculator to find the square root of 225.
Press:

The right side of the display reads 15.

Add the results of the two steps: 9 + 15 = 24.

Practice 7
A. Use a calculator as needed to find the value of the expressions as
directed.
1. What is the value of 5x2 + 3x + 5 when x = 2?
2. Find the value of
to the nearest tenth when x = 5.
3. If x = −3, what is the value of 7x2 + 2x − 6?
4. What is the value of

when x = 3?

5. Find the value of 3(2x + 3 + x) − 14 when x = −2 and y = 9.
6. If y = −3, what is the value of 4y3 + 2 (y2 − 4)?
7. What is the value of 2(x2 + 6) + 3(x − 1) when x = 5?
8. If x = 4 and y = −4, what is the value of the expression 6x2 + 3y2 + 2?
9. Find the value of −2(x3 + 3) + 16x + 2 when x = 2.
10. If x = 7, what is the value of the expression 7 + 3(x − 2) − 2x2?
11. Find the value of −(x + y)+ 3(2z − y) if x =−5, y = −7, and z = 4.

12. What is the value of the expression x2 −7(3 − y)+ 4 when x = 5 and y =
4?
13. If x = −2 and y = 8, what is the value of x2 + y −6(y + 3)?
14. What is the value of
to the nearest tenth when x = 6?
15. If x = 20, what is the value of the expression 4(x + 7) − 3(x − 2)?
16. Find the value of

when x = −3, y = 4, and x = −1.

17. What is the value of 5y2 + 4x2 −6(x − y) when x = 5 and y = −2?
18. Find the value of

when x = 6 and y = 1.

19. What is the value of the expression (x2 + 5)(x2 − x + 2) −3 when x =
−4?
20. Find the value of (x + y)(x − y)(2x + y) when x = 9 and y = 4.
B. Choose the one best answer to each question.

21. Jake has to buy enough fencing to enclose the rectangular garden
shown above.
The formula for finding the perimeter of (or distance around) a
rectangle is P = 2l + 2w, where P = perimeter, l = length, and w =
width. Using the values from the drawing, what is the perimeter, in

meters, of the garden?
A. 18.1
B. 36.2
C. 70
D. 140
22. If x = −5 and y = 2, which of the following expressions has the greatest
value?
A. x + y
B. −x + y
C. xy
D. −2xy
23. What is the value of the expression 2 ÷ x−4 when x = 2?
A. 32
B. 16
C. 8
D. -16
Answers and explanations begin on page 673.

Lesson 8: Understand Polynomials
Key Ideas
A polynomial is an expression with more than one term—any
combination of coefficients, variables, exponents, and constants.
Specific types of polynomials include monomials, binomials, and
trinomials.

The GED® Mathematical Reasoning Test will expect you to understand -

polynomials. A polynomial is made up of terms, and since the prefix polymeans “many,” a polynomial is a term in which many parts are being
combined. Each term in a polynomial may be made up of a combination of
coefficients, variables, exponents, and constants.

Coefficients include numbers such as 4, −25, or

and will come before

the variables. Coefficients can be negative, like −25. If there is no coefficient
next to a variable, assume the coefficient is 1. In the expression x + y + z, the
coefficient in front of each variable is equal to 1.
Variables are letters such as x and y in polynomial terms. In the polynomial
45a2b, the variables are a and b.
Exponents, or powers, are a way of showing repeated multiplication. This is
also known as raising a number or variable to a power. Polynomials must be
raised to whole number exponents. There are no negative or fractional
powers in polynomials. In the polynomial 6x3y4, the exponents are 3 and 4.
The degree of a polynomial with only one variable is the largest exponent of
that variable. For example, in the expression 4x3 + 3x2 − 5, the degree is 3
(the largest exponent of x.)

GED® TEST TIP
If there is no coefficient next to a variable, assume the
coefficient is 1.
A constant is a number on its own that will always remain the same. It is not
next to a variable. A constant can be either positive or negative, depending on
whether it is being added or subtracted. In the expression 4x3 + 3x2 − 5, the
constant is 5. No matter what value you substitute for x, 5 will always be just
5.

Polynomials are built out of all of the components above, and there are
different types of polynomials, including monomials, binomials, and
trinomials. These are important to know.
A monomial is a polynomial with only one term. An example of a
monomial is xy2. This term is made up of a coefficient (4), two variables
(x and y), and an exponent (the power of 2).
A binomial is a polynomial with two terms. An example of a binomial
is 3x + 2. The first term is made up of a coefficient (3) and a variable
(x), and the second term consists of a constant (2).
A trinomial is a polynomial with three terms. An example of a
trinomial is 4x + 3y2 − 4. The first term is made up of a coefficient (4)
and a variable (x). The second term is made up of a coefficient (3), a
variable (y), and an exponent (the power of 2). The third term is made
up of a constant, and this time it is a negative number (−4).
A few types of numbers are not categorized as polynomials and cannot be
present in polynomial terms. These include the following:

Division by a variable, such as

or

Negative exponents, such as 4xy2 (exponents can only be 0, 1, 2, etc.)
Fractional exponents, such as
Variables inside radicals, such as
In a polynomial term, however, you can divide by a constant or have numbers
inside a radical. For example,

Practice 8

is allowed, as is

.

A. Identify whether each of the following is a monomial, binomial, or
trinomial.
1. 25a
2. 2xy2z
3. x − 4
4. x3 + y −1
5. 7y − 1
6. 2x4 + 3x + 4

7.

8. y2
9. g2h2i2j2
10. x2 + x2
11. x2 + 14x + 3
12. x2y + x2 + y
13. g + h
14.
15. 3x2 − 5
B. For each polynomial, identify the terms. Remember that a coefficient
can be positive or negative.
16. 3x4 −2 x2 + 3
17. 12a2bc
18. 3g − 4h
19. x2 + y
20. −4a −3b2 + c
21. 25
22. x2 + 3x − 7

23.

24.

25.
26. 49x2y2z2
27. 18y2 − 4y2 + 8
28. 3h − 4
29. x2 − x + y2 − 2
30. ab + ab2 + b2 − 4
C. Choose the one best answer to each question.
31. What is the sum of the exponents in the expression 4x3 + 3x2 + 5?
A. 3
B. 5
C. 12
D. 17
32. What is the sum of the coefficients in the expression a − 3b − c + 2d?
A. −3
B. −1
C. 2
D. 3
Answers and explanations begin on page 673.

Lesson 9: Simplify Polynomials

Combine Like Terms
When working with polynomials, you must work to combine like terms. Like
terms have variables that are the same or are terms that have the same
variable raised to the same power, or exponent. For example, 8x3 and 4x3 are
like terms, and 5y and 3y are also like terms.
Unlike terms have variables that are different or have the same variable
raised to different powers. For example, 3a and 5b are unlike terms. The
terms 9x and 7x2 are also unlike terms because the variables are raised to
different powers.

Key Ideas
Like terms can be combined; unlike terms cannot.
Like terms are either numbers—positive or negative—or variables
with the same degree of exponents.
Polynomials with unlike terms cannot be simplified.

You can only combine like terms when simplifying polynomials. Unlike
terms cannot be combined. For example, in the polynomial 7x2 + 4x3, you
cannot combine the terms because x is raised to different powers in each
term. However, in the polynomial 7x2 + 4x2, you can combine terms that all
have the same variable and the same exponent: 7x2 + 4x2 = 11x2.
Example 1: Combine like terms in the polynomial 4y3 + 2x3 − 7x3.
1. First, identify and group the like terms.
4y3 + 7y3 + 2x3
The two y3 terms are alike; the x3 term cannot be combined with them.
2. Combine the like terms.
−3y3 + 2x3

GED® TEST TIP
When working with polynomials, treat the minus sign before a
coefficient or constant as an indicator of a negative number.
This will help you to combine like terms using the rules of
signed numbers that you learned on pages 316–318.

Simplify Polynomials
Some polynomials may contain both like and unlike terms. The following
example shows how like and unlike terms are handled when you have to
simplify a polynomial. Start by combining like terms with the largest
exponent, and proceed to the terms with the smaller exponents.
Example 2: Simplify the polynomial 7x4 −13x2 + x4 + 2x2 + 5x + 3 + x.
1. Combine like terms with the largest degree, which is 4. Add: 7x4 + x4 =
8x4.
2. You now have 8x4 −13x2 + 2x2 + 5x + 3 + x. Combine like terms from
the exponent with the next largest degree, which is 2. Add: −13x2 + 2x2
= −11x2.
3. You now have 8x4 − 11x2 + 5x + 3 + x. Finally, combine like terms
with the next largest degree, which is 1. Add: 5x + x = 6x.
4. You now have 8x4 − 11x2 + 6x + 3.
This is as much as you can simplify this polynomial by combining like terms.
The simplified polynomial has no more like terms and must remain as is.

Practice 9
A. For each pair of terms, indicate if they are like terms or unlike terms.

1. 4x3, x3 ___________ terms
2. 3x, x ________ terms
3. b, b2 ________ terms
4. −2x, 7x ________ terms
5. −2x, 7x _______ terms
6. 4a, 4 _________ terms
7. g2, g2hi________ terms
8. 2x2y, 8x2y ________ terms
9. −5m, −5m2 _______ terms
10. x2y, xy2 _______ terms
11. ab, 8ab _________ terms
12. 3y, 3y2 _________ terms
13. 14g,

_________ terms

14. 12x2, x2 _________ terms
15. a, ab2 _________ terms
16. 15x2, −x2 _________ terms
17. 10y, 11yz _________ terms
18.
_________ terms
19. g, −g2 _________ terms
20.
_________ terms
B. Simplify each expression by combining like terms.
21. 3x2y + 4x2y
22. 3b + b
23. a − 7a + 3
24. 14ab + ab2 + 2ab + 3
25. x2 − 3x2 + 7
26. ab + 2ab + ab
27. 7g + 7gh + 7g + 7gh
28. g2 + h2 − 4g2h2 + g2 + h2 − 4
29. 9y + y − y2 − y

30. x2 − 8x2 + y −3
31. 11y + 11y −7
32. 9x2y − 3x2y + 4y2 − 21+ y2 − 2
33. 8x2 − 4x + 7 + 4x3 − x2 + 7x − 2
34. −3x2 + 6x − 2x2 − 10x + 5
35. 9x2 − 3x3 + x − 2x2
C. Choose the one best answer to each question.
36. What is the simplified form of the expression 3a2b + 4ab + 3a2b +
5ab?
A. 6a3b2 + 8a3b2
B. 6a2b + 9ab
C. 6a2b + 8ab
D. 15a6 + b4
37. When simplified, how many terms are in the polynomial j2 + k3 −2j3 +
5k3 − 2j2?
A. 2
B. 3
C. 4
D. 5
Answers and explanations begin on page 673.

Lesson 10: Add and Subtract Polynomials

Add Polynomials with One Variable
On the Mathematical Reasoning Test, you may be required to add

polynomials that have one variable. You can add polynomials when they
have like terms, including variables and exponents. When you see
polynomials within parentheses linked by an addition sign, add them by
combining the like terms across the polynomials.
Example 1: Add (3x2 + x + 4) + (2x2 + 2x − 16).
1. To add these polynomials, simply combine like terms. Add: 3x2 +
2x2 = 5x2.
2. Add: x + 2x = 3x.
3. Add: 4 + (−16) = −12.
4. Combine the results into one polynomial: 5x2 + 3x − 12.

Key Ideas
Monomials, binomials, or trinomials can be added or subtracted.
In some cases, a polynomial needs to be simplified before it can be
added or subtracted.
When subtracting polynomials, distribute the second polynomial,
changing the signs for coefficients, and then combine all the like
terms.

Sometimes, an expression needs to be simplified before you add and combine
like terms.
Example 2: Add (5x2 + 8x − 4) + (2x2 −6x + 14x).
1. Simplify within the second parentheses. Add: −6x + 14x = 8x.
2. Combine like terms across the polynomials. Add: 5x2 + 2x2 = 7x2.
3. Use the simplified expression from step 1. Add: 8x + 8x = 16x.
4. Combine the results into one polynomial: 7x2 + 16x − 4.

GED® TEST TIP
When you subtract, you are simply reversing the signs within

the second polynomial. Be careful to make all negative signs
positive. Study Examples 3 and 4 carefully to avoid common
errors.

Subtract Polynomials with One Variable
The only difference between adding and subtracting polynomials is the minus
sign between the parentheses. You must distribute the negative sign across
the second polynomial. To distribute the negative sign across the second
polynomial, simply reverse the signs of each term. Then drop the parentheses
and combine like terms across both polynomials.
Example 3: Subtract (3x2 + x + 4) − (7x2 + 2x − 16).
1. Distribute the negative sign to everything in the second set of
parentheses by reversing the sign of each term: −7x2 −2x + 16.
2. Drop the parentheses from the entire expression and combine like
terms:

Note that subtracting a negative constant or coefficient is the same as adding
a positive. In the next example, watch what happens to the negative
coefficient inside the second set of parentheses when the sign is distributed.
Example 4: Subtract (x2 + 2x + 3)−(4x2 − x + 6).
1. Distribute the negative sign to everything in the second set of
parentheses by reversing the sign of each term: −4x2 + x − 6

2. Drop the parentheses and combine like terms:

Practice 10.1
A. Add the following polynomials.
1. (3x + 4) + (2x + 2)
2. (17y − y + 3) + (4y + 3y + 3)
3. (5x2 −3x− 4) + (3x2 − 2x + 6)
4. (−a2 + 2a) + (16a2 + 6a)
5. (9x2 − 3x − 2) + (2x2 + 5x + 5)
6. (6a + 6) + (−5a − 5)
7. (−8g2 + 7g + 6) + (8g2 −7g − 5)
8. (2x2 + 5x) + (2x2 + 4x + 7x − 9)
9. (13y + 4y + 4) + (7y −7)
10. (−a2 − a2 − a − 4) + (−a2 − a2 − a − 5)
B. Subtract the following polynomials.
11. (3y − 4) − (2y −2)
12. (x + 16) − (4x + 3)
13. (2a + 1) − (−a − 1)
14. (5x2 + 2x + 4) − (2x2 + x + 2)
15. (7y + 5y + 5) − (2y −2)
16. (9x2 + 4x + 5x + 4) − (7x2 + 6x − 9)
17. (−g + g −1) − (−g − g − 2)
18. (17a2 − 4a − 4) − (16a2 + 6a − 6)
19. (7b2 + b − 8) − (7b2 + b + 8)

20. (21x2 + 3x2 −2x − 4 − 1) −1)−(3x2 + x2 + x + 2x − 5 − 1)
C. Choose the one best answer to each question.
21. What is the sum of the polynomials
(2xy + 3xy2 − 4x2y) + (5x2y − 3xy2 + 2xy)?
A. x2y + 4xy
B. 4xy + 3x + y
C. 7x − 2y
D. 7x2y − 2xy
22. Which of the following equals
(5x2 − 2x + 1) − (3x2 − 3x − 2)?
A. x − 5x − 1
B. 2x2 − x + 3
C. 2x2 + x + 3
D. 2x2 − 5x + 3
Answers and explanations begin on page 673.

Simplifying Polynomials with More Than One
Variable
Some polynomials contain terms with different variables—for example, the
binomial 2x + 3y contains an x term and a y term. You add, subtract, and
simplify polynomials with more than one variable just as you do polynomials
with just a single variable. However, you have to be careful to add and
subtract only like terms. Remember that in all polynomials, like terms have
the same variable and the same exponent. For example, in the polynomial x2
+ 2x + y2 + 3x + 2y, the only like terms are the two x1 terms. You can
combine the 2x and the 3x, but you cannot combine x2 with any other term,

nor can you combine the y2 or the 2y with any other term. The most
simplified version of this polynomial is x2 + 5x + y2 + 2y.
A term that consists of two or more variables multiplied together cannot be
combined with terms that contain only one of those variables. For example,
you cannot combine 2xy + 7x. However, you can combine 2xy + 7xy to get
9xy.
Example 1: Simplify 6xy4 − 20x2 − 3 + xy4 + 12x2 − 30.
Start by grouping the like terms
together. Then add and subtract
as appropriate.

Adding Polynomials with More Than One Variable
Adding polynomials that contain more than one variable requires the same
process as adding polynomials that have only one variable. Just remove the
brackets and combine like terms across both polynomials. Remember that
only like terms can be combined.
Example 2: Add (3x2 + 6x + 3xy) + (5x2 − 6xy + 14y).

Subtracting Polynomials with More Than One
Variable
Subtracting polynomials that contain more than one variable is exactly the

same as subtracting polynomials that contain only a single variable.
Remember to distribute the minus sign across the second polynomial when
you remove the parentheses. Also, remember that only like terms can be
combined.
Example 3: Subtract (3xy2 + x + 2xy + 4) − (7xy2 + 2xy −16).

Notice that there is no xy term in the final simplified expression because 2xy
− 2xy = 0.

Practice 10.2
A. Simplify the following polynomials.
1. a2 + 2a + b2 + 3a + 3b2
2. x + 3xy + y + 16 − 5x − 4xy
3. yz2 − z2 + 5 + 3yz − 3z2 + 4yz
4. ab − b + c + 17 + 6ab − 34
5. a4 + c2 + 3ac − 5a4 − 2c2 + 5
6. 19xyz + x − y + 3xyz + 6+ y
7. ef + ef2 − 10 + 6ef + f
8. p + pq − q − p + 3pq − 3 − q + 7
B. Add the following polynomials.
9. (ab + b − c + 6) + (3ab − b + c − 6)
10. (x2 + xy − y − 3) + (− x2 − xy + y + 3)
11. (p6 + p5 + pq − p2 ) + (2p6 − p5 + 3pq − q2)
12. (x + xy + 7) + (y − xy + 8)
13. (9a + bc + c2) + (−9a − b + bc −c2)
14. (4xyz + 4x − 4y) + (6xyz − 4x − 4y + 16)

15. (5a + 5b + 4c −6) + (a − b − 4c + d + 6)
16. (pq − q + 15) + (6pq − 15)
C. Subtract the following polynomials.
17. (ab + a + b + 6) − (8ab + a − b − 6)
18. (xy + x + y) − (xy + x + y)
19. (p2 + q2 + 14) − (3p2 − 4q2 + 7)
20. (x4 + yz + z4 ) − (yz + z5)
21. (bc2 + bc + c − 7) − (2bc −c −7)
22. (xy + xz − xyz) − (4xy + xyz)
23. (c3d7 + c2 − d + 35) − (2c2 −3d + 35)
24. (ef2g − fg + 16) − (ef2 + fg + 8)
D. Choose the one best answer to each question.
25. Which of the following equals
(x + y + z) − (−2x + 2y + z)?
A. −x + 3y + 2z
B. −2x − y + 2z
C. 3x − 2y + 2z
D. 3x − y
26. Which of the following equals
(2g2 + 3h − 5k) + (g2 + 2h + 3k)?
A. g2 + h − 8k
B. 3g2 + 5h − 2k
C. 2g2 + 6h2 − 15k2
D. 2g4 + 5h−2k
Answers and explanations begin on page 674.

Lesson 11: Multiply Polynomials
Multiply a Monomial by a Monomial
To multiply two monomials, multiply each component separately. Start by
multiplying the coefficients (or numbers). If there is no coefficient given,
assume that the coefficient is 1 (for example, xy = 1xy). Then, multiply each
variable separately by adding the exponents of like variables. Remember that
a variable with no exponent is a variable raised to the first power (for
example, x = x1). So x(x3)= x1(x3) = x4.

Key Ideas
There are a number of ways to multiply polynomials.
The basic concepts in all involve learning procedures for multiplying
constants, variables, and exponents.
A common method for multiplying two binomials is called FOIL for
short.

Example 1: Multiply (2ab)(4b).
2 × 4 × a × b1 × b1 = 8ab2

Multiply a Monomial by a Binomial
To multiply a monomial by a binomial, multiply the monomial by the first
term in the binomial, then multiply the monomial by the second term in the
binomial. Finally, add the resulting terms.
Example 2: Multiply −2z2(z + 3yz)
1. Distribute the negative sign:

2. Multiply the monomial by each term in the binomial:

3. Add:

GED® TEST TIP
Always finish the FOIL method by combining like terms after
you have multiplied.

Multiply Two Binomials
To multiply two binomials, multiply the first terms, then the outer terms, then
the inner terms, and, finally, the last terms. Add the results and combine like
terms. You can remember this process by the acronym FOIL, which stands
for First, Outer, Inner, Last.
Example 3: Multiply (2g2 + 9) (3g2 − 4).
1. Multiply using FOIL:

2. Simplify each product:
3. Combine like terms:

Practice 11
A. Multiply the monomials.
1. (6x)(5x)
2. (2xy)(3y)
3. (7abc)(4bc)
4. (12y)(z)
5. (a)(9bc)
6. (5xyz)(2xy2z4)
7. (4ab)(bc2)
8. (17f2gh3)(2fh4)
B. Multiply the binomials by the monomials.
9. 3z2(6xy + 4z)
10. 6x(7x − 6z)
11. −5ab(3b + 11c)
12. −3f3 (6h −8fgh2)
13. 10z(7x7 − 5z)
14. −z(−z − 6xy)
15. 8b(9ab + 8a)
16. −9(−2x4 + 3xy2)
C. Multiply the binomials by using FOIL. Remember to complete by
combining like terms wherever possible.
17. (x + 5)(x − 6)
18. (x + y)(x + y)
19. (z + 9)(z − 9)
20. (yz2 + x)(yz2 − 3x)
21. (3x + 3)(3x + 5)
22. (x + y)(x − y)
23. (y2 − 6)(y4 + 10)
24. (ab + 3)(ab − 4)
D. Choose the one best answer to each question.

25. Which of the following expressions is equal to (4a3b2 )(3a2c)?
A. 12a5b2c
B. 7a5b2c
C. 12a6bc
D. 7a6b2c
26. Martha has 2pc2 board games, and John has 6p2c board games. Which
of the following expressions represents the product of the number of
board games that Martha and John have?
A. 8p3c3
B. 8p2c2
C. 12p2c2
D. 12p3c3
27. Which of the following expressions is equal to (4ab + 2)(3ab − 7)?
A. 7a2b2 + 22ab + 5
B. 12a2b2 − 22ab − 14
C. 12a2b2 + 22ab + 14
D. 7a2b2 − 22ab −5
Answers and explanations begin on page 674.

Lesson 12: Divide Polynomials
Key Ideas
You can divide a polynomial by numbers, expressions, or other
polynomials.
The key to dividing a polynomial is to isolate a common factor that
divides into the numerator and denominator.
Common factors can be numbers, variables, or a combination of the

two such as addition, subtraction, or multiplication expressions.

Divide Polynomials by a Number
The Mathematical Reasoning Test will sometimes ask you to simplify a
polynomial that is written as a fraction. To simplify, divide the numerator and
denominator by a common term. A common term can be the following:
a number
a variable with a number as a coefficient
a more complicated expression
You may need to factor the common term out of the numerator or
denominator before you can do the division.
Example 1: Simplify

.

GED® TEST TIP
Remember that you will be provided with a wipe-off board
during the Mathematical Reasoning Test. You will be able to
use that board to carefully work through the steps needed to
solve these types of problems.

Divide Polynomials by an Expression

Dividing a polynomial by an expression is really no different from dividing
by a number. You need a common term in the numerator and denominator,
and you may have to factor out that common term (including any variables)
before you can do the division.
Example 2: Simplify

When the numerator has two added or subtracted expressions that both
include the common term, it may be easier to split the polynomial into two
separate fractions and simplify them separately. Doing it this way will help
you keep straight exactly which terms you can cancel.
Example 3: Simplify

Undefined Expressions
When the denominator of an expression equals zero, the expression is
undefined.
Example 4: What is the value of

when x = y?

Because x = y, y − x = y − y. Because y − y = 0, this expression is undefined.

Practice 12
A. To simplify, divide each polynomial by a number. (You may need to
factor the numerator and/or denominator to find the common term.)

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

10.

11.
12.
B. Divide each polynomial. Decide whether it is easier for you to divide
the original numerator by the common term (as in Example 2) or
whether to split the numerator first (as in Example 3).
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.

18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.

24.
C. Choose the one best answer to each question.
25. Which of the following is equal to

?

A. 5a + 5b
B. 3a + 14b
C. 3a + 2b
D. 21a + 2b
26. James has 27x apples, Rachel has 51y oranges, and Glen has 60z
peaches. Which of the following expressions represents the average
number of pieces of fruit that James, Rachel, and Glen have?
A. 9x + 51y + 60z
B. 46x + 46y + 46z
C. 9x + 17y + 60z
D. 9x + 17y + 20z
27. Which of the following expressions is equal to
?
A. z − 5
B. z(z + 2) − 5
C. z(z + 2) − 5(z + 2)
D. z − 3
28. For what values of a is the expression
A. a = 4
B. a ≤ 0

undefined?

C. a = 16
D. a ≤ 0
Answers and explanations begin on page 674.

Algebra Basics, Expressions, and
Polynomials Practice Questions
1. Which of the following expressions is equal to 6 − 4(x + 3)?
A. 4x + 3
B. 4x −9
C. −4x + 9
D. −4x −6
2. If Kris makes d dollars and Heidi makes 75 dollars less than 3 times
Kris’s wage, what does Heidi make in terms of d?
A. d + 75
B. d − 225
C. 3d −75
D. 3d − 225
3. What is the product of 700 and 180,000 written in scientific notation?
A. 12.6 × 109
B. 1.26 × 108
C. 1.26 × 109
D. 1.26 × 1010
4. If there are 4x identical schools in a region and each school has 3y
classrooms each with 7x desks, how many desks are there in the
region?
A. 11x + 3y

B. 28x + 3y
C. 84xy2
D. 84x2y
5. Which of the following is equivalent to x2 − 25?
A. x(x − 25)
B. (x −5)2
C. (x + 5)(x −5)
D. (x − 25)2
6. If Tom has 9x baseball cards, Adam has 13 more than Tom, and Dave
has 2y baseball cards, together they would have how many cards?
A. 9x + 2y +13
B. 18xy + 13
C. 18xy + 2y
D. 18x + 2y +13
Questions 7 and 8 refer to the figure below.
The figure below is a multiplication box. Each place represents the horizontal
number multiplied by the vertical number; for example, the 9 in the lower
right corner equals 3 multiplied by 3.

7. Which of the following is equal to ab?
A. 5y
B. 60y
C. 100y
D. 500y
8. Which of the following is equal to a − d?

A. b
B. c
C. x
D. y
9. Multiply 7c2 (a2 + 5b + 7c2).
A. 7a2c2 + 35bc2 + 49c4
B. 7(ac)2 + 35(bc)2 + 49c4
C. 7a2 + 35b + 49c4
D. a2 + 5b +14c2
10. A Little League pie sale fundraiser generated $900 in revenue. If there
were 6x pies sold, how much did each pie cost?
A. $10
B. $15
C.
D.

11. Simplify the expression

A.

B.

.

C.
D. 1
12. Emilie buys x ounces of chicken for each of her guests at a dinner party.
There are 8y people coming, and chicken is $z a pound. How much will
the total amount of chicken cost in dollars? (Hint: There are 16 ounces in
one pound.)
A. 8xyz
B. 16xyz
C.

D.

13. What is the value of the expression 6(x − y) −8x when x = −2 and y = 5?
A. −58
B. −26
C. 2
D. 34
14. Which of the following is equal to x2 + 6z multiplied by 2y − 4z if x = 2, y
= 4, and y = 3?
A. −88
B. −72
C. 0
D. 104
15. What is the value of the following expression?

Write your answer on the line below.
__________________________

16. If every member of a team is paid 5p dollars for his or her participation,
and Team Alpha has 6k members, Team Beta has 4p members, and Team
Delta has 9h members, which of the following represents the total amount
paid, in dollars, to the members of all three teams?
A. 1080hkp
B. 1080hkp2
C. 120p2k + 45ph
D. 30kp + 20p2 + 45hp
17. Which of the following is equal to 7x −[(5y)2x −9y + 8x]?
A. x − 9y + 10xy
B. −3x − 4y
C. −x + 9y −10xy
D. 15x − 9y + 10xy
18. If Stephanie has 5c CDs for every DVD Alyshia has, and Jeff has 4d
DVDs, which is 15 more than Alyshia has, how many CDs does
Stephanie have?
A. 20cd − 75c
B. 20cd + 15
C. 80cd − 15
D. 80cd −75c
19. Divide

.

A. 8x2 + 7xy3 −12x −1
B. 8x4 + 7x3x3 − 12x3 − x2
C. 8x4 + 7y3 − 5x3 −1
D. 49x2 + 42xy3 − 77x
20. A charity with a yearly budget of 80d gets all of its money from either its
yearly ball or from private donations. If the charity raised 64d from the
silent auction at the ball and 4a from ticket sales at the ball, how much
will need to be raised in private donations to meet the budget?
A. 16d
B. 16d − 4a
C. 16d + 4a
D. 144d − 4a
21. Divide:

A.

B.

C.

D.

22. If 12k privates, 8f lieutenants, and 6r captains are divided into 2r equal
squads, which of the following would express the number of members of
one squad?
A. 6k + 4f + 3r
B.
C. 12k + 8f + 4r
D. 12k + 8f + 3r
23. If x ≠ 0, q = 2, and r = 4, which of the following would equal
?
A. 4x + 2
B. 4x2 + 2
C. 16x2 + 8x − 2
D. 16x2 + 21
24. Simplify:

A. 4x4 + 5xy2 + 8x −1
B. 2x4 + 5xy3 − y2 −8

C.

D.
25. Simplify:
(6x2 + 5xy2)(y) − (4xy − 9x)(4xy).
A. 5xy3 −16x2y2 + 42x2y
B. 5xy3 −16x2y2 − 30x2y
C. 6x2y −11x2y2 − 36xy2
D. 6x2y + 5x2y2 − 36xy2 + 16xy
26. There are 4x workers, including managers, in an office. If the salaries of
the 3 managers are not included, the average salary of each employee is
5x − 6 dollars. What do the nonmanagerial employees earn in total?
A. 20x2 − 24x
B. 20x2 − 24x − 3
C. 20x2 −9x + 18
D. 20x2 − 39x + 18

27. What is the value of

A. 12
B. 51
C. 108
D. 153
28. Simplify:

if x = 6 and y = 3?

A. x3 −1
B. x3 − 3x −1
C. 3x −1
D. x −1
29. If the 3h people in one country and the 4k people in the neighboring
country each consume h − 17 pounds of rice per year on average, how
many pounds of rice would be consumed by both countries in one year?
A. 4h + 4k − 17
B. 4h2 + 4k −68k
C. 12hk + h − 17
D. 3h2 + 4hk − 51h − 68k
30. Simplify:

A. 2x2 + 2y2 − xy
B. 4x2 + xy − 2x − 2y
C. 4x2 − xy − 2x − 2y
D. 3x2 − 2xy2 − xy
Questions 31 and 32 refer to the figure below.
The figure below is a multiplication box. Each place represents the horizontal
number multiplied by the vertical number; for example, the 20 in the lower
right corner equals 5 multiplied by 4.

31. Which of the following is equal to a?
A. 2
B. 4
C. 5
D. 10
32. Which of the following is equal to a2c?
A. 13
B. 40
C. 42
D. 60
Answers and explanations begin on page 674.

CHAPTER 6

Equations, Inequalities, and Functions
Lesson 1: Equations
Writing and Solving One-Step Equations
An equation is a mathematical statement that two expressions are equal.

Key Ideas
An equation states that two expressions are equal.
To solve an equation, isolate the variable by applying inverse operations
to both sides of the equation.
Check your work by substituting your solution for the variable in the
original equation and simplifying.
Examples:
An equation can contain one or more variables. Solving an equation means
finding a value for the variable that will make the equation true.

Examples:

The basic strategy in solving an equation is to isolate the variable on one side
of the equation. You can do this by performing inverse, or opposite,
operations. However, you must always follow one basic rule: whatever you
do to one side of the equation, you must also do to the other side.
Example 1: Solve

.

On the left side of the equation, the number 23 is subtracted from x. The
inverse of subtraction is addition. Add 23 to both sides of the equation.
To check your work, replace the variable with your solution and simplify.
When

, the equation is true.

GED® TEST TIP
If you are unsure about a multiple-choice algebra problem,
substitute each of the answer choices for the variable in the
equation. You may be able to do this quickly using your
calculator.
The following examples use the inverse operations of multiplication and
division.

Example 2: Solve

.

The variable x is divided by 2. Since multiplication is the inverse of division,
you must multiply each side of the equation by 2.
When
Example 3: Solve

, the equation is true.
.

Since the variable x is multiplied by 5, divide both sides of the equation by 5.

When

, the equation is true.

Practice 1.1
A. Solve for the variable in each equation.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.

18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
B. Choose the one best answer to each question.
Questions 29 and 30 refer to the following table.
April Time Sheet Summary Hours Worked per Week
Week

1

2

3

Kayla Sax

36

40

40

24

28

Erin Grady

4
38

29. Kayla and Erin worked a total of 77 hours during Week 1. Let
Erin’s hours for Week 1. Which of the following
equations could be used to solve for Erin’s hours during Week 1?
A.
B.

C.
D.
30. Erin worked twice as many hours as Kayla did during Week 4. Let y =
Kayla’s hours for Week 4. Which of the following equations could be
used to solve for Kayla’s hours during Week 4?
A.
B.
C.
D.
31. A number divided by 4 is 32. What is the number?
A. 8
B. 28
C. 128
D. 512
32. The solution

makes which of the following equations

true?
A.
B.
C.
D.
33. Mike had $572.18 in his checking account. After writing a check, he

had $434.68. Which of the following equations could be used to find
the amount of the check (c)?
A.
B.
C.
D.

Answers and explanations begin on page 676.

Solving Multi-Step Equations
Most equations require more than one operation in order to find a solution.
Follow these basic steps:
Simplify by combining like terms.
Perform addition and subtraction steps.
Perform multiplication and division steps.
Example 1: Solve
1. Combine like terms

.
.

2. Subtract 5 from both sides.
3. Divide both sides by 4.
4. Check by substituting the solution for x in the original equation.

In this example, the distributive property is used to simplify an expression.
Notice that not every step is written out. As you gain experience, you can
perform an operation on both sides of an equation mentally.
Example 2: Solve

.

1. Use the distributive property to remove the grouping symbols.

2. Add 4x to each side.
3. Divide each side by 6.
4. Check.

Some of the time you will be expected to write an equation from information
given in the problem. The problem will describe two expressions that are
equal. Write each expression in symbols and connect the expressions with the
equal sign (=). In many problems, the word is indicates
.
Example 3: The product of a number and 6 is 44 more than twice the number.
What is the number?

1. Write an equation. The word is represents the equal sign.
2. Subtract 2x from both sides.
3. Divide both sides by 4.
4. Check.

The number described in the problem is 11.
NOTE: Subtraction and division operations must be written in the order
indicated by the words. “The difference between x and y” must be written
, not

. “The quotient of x and y” must be written

Practice 1.2
A. Solve for the variable in each equation.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

, not

.

11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
B. Choose the one best answer to each question.
21. Three times a number increased by 9 is 15 less than six times the
number. Let
unknown number. Which of the following
equations could be used to find the value of x?
A.
B.
C.
D.
22. Dave has 500 baseball cards, which is as many as Eric and Travis have
combined. Eric has three times as many cards as Travis has.
Dave

Eric

Travis

500

3x

x

From the information, you can write the equation
. How
many cards does Eric have? (Hint: Solve for x. Then find how many

cards Eric has.)
A. 150
B. 250
C. 350
D. 375
23. The difference of four times a number and 7 is 15 plus the quotient of
the number and 3. Which of the following equations could be used to
find the value of x?
A.
B.
C.
D.
24. Kim earned x dollars at his part-time job on Friday. His wife earned
$12 more than twice Kim’s pay

. Together, they

earned $174. How much did Kim earn on Friday?
(Hint: Use the equation x
A. $54
B. $87
C. $108
D. $120
Answers and explanations begin on page 676.

Lesson 2: Equation Word Problems

Algebra problems describe how several numbers are related. One number is
the unknown, which you will represent with a variable. Using the
relationships described in the problem, you can write an equation and solve
for the variable.

Key Ideas
To solve a word problem, decide what quantity will be represented by x.
Then write expressions for the other quantities in terms of x.
Write and solve an equation. Answer the question asked in the problem.
Example 1: There are twice as many women as men in a class on auto repair.
If there are 24 students in the class, how many are women?
1. Express the numbers in the problem in terms of the same variable. Let
x represent the number of men. Since there are twice as many women,
let 2x represent the number of women.
2. Write and solve an equation. The total number of men and women is

24, so

Since

. Solve:

. There are 8 men and 16 women in the class.

Consecutive numbers are numbers that follow in counting order. For
example, 1, 2, and 3 are consecutive numbers. The numbers 2, 4, and 6 are
consecutive even numbers, and 1, 3, and 5 are consecutive odd numbers.

GED® TEST TIP
When you find x, you may not be finished solving a problem.
Always reread the question. As shown in Examples 1 and 2,

you may need to use the value of x to calculate the solution in a
multi-step problem.
Example 2: The sum of three consecutive numbers is 105. What is the
greatest of the three numbers?
1. Let x represent the first number and
other numbers.
2. Write an equation and solve:

and

represent the

3. Find the answer. The variable x represents the first number in the
sequence, so the three numbers are 34, 35, and 36. The problem asks
for the greatest number, which is 36.
You may need to use the difference between numbers to write equations.
Example 3: The ticket prices for a play are $12 for adults and $8 for children.
One evening, the box office sold 200 tickets. If the total box office
receipts were $2240, how many adult tickets were sold?
1. Let x represent the number of adult tickets. Since 200 tickets were sold,
the number of children’s tickets sold can be written as
.
2. Multiply each term by the cost for that type of ticket. Set the total equal
to $2240, and solve for x.
3. There were 160 adult tickets sold.

Practice 2
A. Solve.
1. Two houses are for sale on the same street. The second house has
1000 square feet less than twice the square feet of the first house.
Together the houses have 4400 square feet. What is the square
footage of the first house?
2. Julia has 24 coins in her pocket. The coins are either dimes or
quarters. The total value of the coins is $4.50. How many coins are
dimes? (Hint: The value of the dimes is 0.10x, and the value of the
quarters is

.)

3. The Bulldogs won twice as many games as they lost. If they played
a total of 36 games, how many did they win? (There were no tied
games.)
4. The sum of four consecutive even numbers is 212. What is the third
number? (Hint: Let
first number,
second number,

the third, and so on.)

5. A children’s store is selling pants for $6 each and shirts for $4.
Brenda bought 13 items and paid $62. How many shirts did she
buy?
6. The sum of three consecutive numbers is 180. What is the least
number in the series?
7. In a month Andrew spends twice as much on rent as he does on
food for his family. Last month, he spent $1650 on rent and food.
How much did he spend on rent?

8. George spends four times as much time helping customers as he
does stocking shelves. Last week, he spent 35 hours on the two
tasks. How many hours were spent helping customers?
B. Choose the one best answer to each question.
9. Sylvia scored 10 points better than Wiley on their science exam. Greg
scored 6 points less than Wiley. Altogether, the students earned 226
points. How many points did Sylvia earn?
A. 74
B. 78
C. 84
D. 94
10. Two adults and four children paid $48 to get into the fair. A child’s
ticket is $6 less than an adult’s ticket. What is the cost of an adult’s
ticket?
A. $15
B. $12
C. $9
D. $6
11. Jenny is four times as old as her niece Tina. In 12 years, Jenny will be
only twice as old as Tina. The chart shows expressions for Tina and
Jenny’s ages now and in 12 years.
Jenny’s Age

Tina’s Age

Now

4x

x

In 12 Years

4x + 12

x + 12

How old is Tina now?
A. 4
B. 6
C. 8

D. 12
Answers and explanations begin on page 676.

Lesson 3: Inequalities
Key Ideas
Use
,
,
, and
to show the relationship between two
unequal expressions.
The symbol always points to the smaller expression.
Use inverse operations to solve inequalities. Reverse the inequality sign
if you multiply or divide by a negative number.
An inequality is a mathematical statement that connects two unequal
expressions. The inequality symbols and their meanings are as follows:
greater than

greater than or equal to

less than

less than or equal to

An inequality is solved much as is an equation. Use inverse operations to
isolate the variable.
Example 1: Solve for x in the inequality
1. Subtract 2 from both sides.

2. Divide both sides by 3.

.

The solution

states that any number less than 2 makes the inequality

true. Check by substituting 1 (a number less than 2) for
which simplifies to

,

, a true statement.

There is one important difference between solving equations and inequalities.
Whenever you multiply or divide both sides of an inequality by a negative
number, you must reverse the inequality symbol.
Example 2: Solve for n in the inequality

.

1. Add 5 to both sides to remove

from the left side of the

equation.

2. Divide both sides by −2 and reverse the inequality symbol.

GED® TEST TIP
Avoid the most common mistake with inequalities: reversing
the symbol accidentally. Always check your work by
substituting any number that fits the solution into the original
inequality.
Check your work by substituting a number that is less than or equal to

into the original inequality. Here

is used for n. Since

is a true statement, the answer is correct.
When an inequality contains a variable, there are usually several numbers that
make the inequality true. For that reason, we often graph the solution. In the
examples below, a closed dot means that the number is included in the
solution set. An open dot means the number is not included.
Examples:

A compound inequality combines two inequalities. To solve a compound
inequality, separate the inequalities and solve both. Then combine the
solutions.
Example 3: Solve

.

1. Write two inequalities and solve each separately.
2. Write the result as a compound inequality.

In other words, any quantity that is greater than 2 and less than 4 will make
the compound inequality true.

Practice 3
A. Solve.
1.
2.
3.

4.

5.
6.
7.

8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.

19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
B. Choose the one best answer to each question.
25. The perimeter of a square can be found using the formula
where s is one side of the square.

,

The perimeter of a square is less than or equal to 64 inches. Which of
the following represents the possible measures of the side of the
square in inches?
A.
B.
C.
D.
26. Three added to the product of
added to the product of

and a number (x) is less than 5
and the number. Which of the

following is a graph of the solution set of x?

Answers and explanations begin on page 677.

Lesson 4: Quadratic Equations
Key Ideas
A quadratic equation can have two solutions.
Set the quadratic equation equal to 0 and factor.
Find the values for x that will make each factor equal 0.
A quadratic equation contains a squared variable, for example,
.
One way to solve quadratic equations is by factoring. This is the simplest
method and the one you should use on the GED® Mathematical Reasoning
Test. When you factor an expression, you find the terms that divide evenly
into the expression.
Example 1: Factor the expression

.

1. Look for a term that divides evenly into both 15x2 and 9x. Both terms
can be divided by 3x.
2. Factor out 3x. Write the terms as factors.

Study Example 2 to learn how to multiply factors with more than one term.
Example 2: Multiply

.

1. Multiply each term in the first factor by each term in the second factor.
2. Combine the results.

This method of multiplying factors is called the FOIL method. The letters in
FOIL stand for First, Outer, Inner, and Last. Use the word FOIL to make sure
you have performed all the necessary operations.
You factor a quadratic equation to solve it. A quadratic equation may have
two solutions. Find values that make the factors equal to 0. Since a number
multiplied by 0 is 0, each of the values is a solution.

GED® TEST TIP
Trial and error can help you factor quadratic equations. The
more you practice, the better you will get at solving them.
Example 3: Solve

.

1. Set the equation equal to 0 by subtracting 4 from both sides.

2. Factor by trial and error. Think: What factors of the last term,

,

when added, will equal

, the number part of the middle term?

3. If either one of the factors equals 0, then the product of the factors will
be 0. Set each factor equal to 0 and solve for x.

The solutions to the quadratic equation are

Practice 4
A. Multiply.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

.

7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
B. Factor each expression.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.

25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
C. Choose the one best answer to each question.
31. What are two solutions for the equation

?

A. −4 and 5
B. 4 and
C. −10 and 2
D.
and 10
32. For which of the following equations is

a solution?

A.
B.
C.
D.
33. What is the only positive solution for the equation
?
A. 5
B. 6

C. 7
D. 8
34. The area of a rectangle is found by multiplying the length by the
width. In the rectangle below, the area of the rectangle is equal to the
expression
.

An expression equal to the length is shown on the diagram. Which of
the following expressions is equal to the width of the rectangle?
A.
B.
C.
D.
Answers and explanations begin on page 677.

Lesson 5: Algebra Problem Solving
Key Ideas
Guess-and-check is a strategy for answering complicated multiplechoice problems.
Choose an answer from the options and try the value in the problem. If
it works, you have found the correct answer.

One strategy that can help you save time on the more complicated algebra
problems is guess-and-check. Guess-and-check means selecting one of the
answer choices and trying that value in the problem. If you guess correctly,
you can move on to the next question. If not, guess again. Guess-and-check is
a good strategy for problems involving quadratic equations and expressions.
Example 1: Which of the following is a solution for the equation
?
A. 4
B. 3
C. 0
D. −1
To solve the problem, you would have to rewrite the equation so that the
quadratic expression equals zero, factor the expression, and solve.
Instead, substitute each answer choice into the equation.

Option (A):

Option (B):

Option (B) 3 makes the equation true.
Guess-and-check can also save time when writing an equation seems difficult.

GED® TEST TIP
Use your judgment. Do not use guess-and-check if you can
quickly see how to solve the problem. Trying each answer
choice may take longer than simply solving the problem.

Example 2: Terry is ten years older than his brother Tomas. Twenty years
ago, Terry was twice as old as Tomas. How old is Terry now?
A. 25
B. 30
C. 40
D. 45
Instead of writing an equation, try each age in the answer choices for Terry.
A. If Terry is 25 now, Tomas is 15. Twenty years ago, Tomas would not
have been born.
B. If Terry is 30 now, Tomas is 20. Twenty years ago, Tomas would have
been 0 years old, and Terry would have been 10.
C. If Terry is 40 now, Tomas is 30. Twenty years ago, Tomas would have
been 10, and Terry would have been 20, which is twice as old as 10.
Therefore, option (C) 40 is correct.

Practice 5
A. Use guess-and-check to solve the following problems.
1. A number divided by 2 is equal to 12 less than the original number.
What is the number?
A. 12
B. 20
C. 24
D. 28
2. For a fundraiser, Sandra raised three times as much money as
Barbara, and Barbara raised $50 more than Matt. Together they
raised $950. How much money did Barbara raise?
A. $150
B. $175

C. $200
D. $325
3. The three packages below weigh a total of 15 pounds.

The first package weighs twice as much as the second package. The
third package weighs three times as much as the second package.
How many pounds does the first package weigh?
A. 2
B. 4
C. 5
D.
4. Hannah scored a total of 170 points on two math tests. The score of
the first test was 6 points lower than the score of the second test.
How many points did Hannah score on the first test?
A. 76
B. 82
C. 88
D. 90
5. Nelson is twice as old as Maria. Six years ago, Nelson was five
times as old as Maria. How old was Nelson six years ago?
A. 5
B. 10
C. 15
D. 20
6. Which of the following is a solution for the quadratic equation

?
A. −3
B. −1
C. 2
D. 3
7. An amusement park sells adults’ and children’s passes. An adult’s
pass is $25, and a child’s pass is $15. A group spent $440 on 20
passes. How many children’s passes did the group purchase?
A. 5
B. 6
C. 9
D. 14
8. The rectangular garden below is twice as long as it is wide. If the
total distance around the garden is 120 feet, what is the width of the
garden in feet?

A. 15
B. 20
C. 30
D. 40

Answers and explanations begin on page 677.

Lesson 6: The Coordinate Plane
Key Ideas
A coordinate grid is formed by two intersecting axes, or number lines.
The x-axis is horizontal, and the y-axis is vertical.
The location of a point is shown by two numbers called an ordered pair:
(x, y).
A coordinate grid is a way to locate points that lie in a plane, or flat surface.
The grid is formed by two intersecting lines, an x-axis and a y-axis. The xaxis is actually a horizontal number line, and the y-axis is a vertical number
line. The point at which the two axes intersect is called the origin.

Each point on the grid can be named using two numbers called an ordered
pair. The first number is the distance from the origin along the x-axis. The
second number is the distance from the origin along the y-axis. The numbers
are written in parentheses and are separated by a comma: (x, y).
Example 1: Write the ordered pairs for points M and P.

1. Point M lies 2 spaces to the right of the origin along the x-axis and 3
spaces above the origin along the y-axis. The coordinates are (2, 3).
2. Point P lies 1 space to the left along the x-axis and 3 spaces down
along the y-axis. The coordinates are
.
To plot points on the grid, use the number lines located at the axes.
Remember that right and up are the directions for positive numbers and left
and down are the directions for negative numbers.

Example 2: Point A is located at
, and point B is located at
these points on a coordinate grid.

. Plot

GED® TEST TIP
If you are given a coordinate grid that is not labeled, remember
that the origin is at (0,0). Starting at the origin, count either
right or left first, then up or down.
1. To plot point A, start at the origin. Count 2 spaces left along the x-axis.
Count 1 space up along the y-axis.
2. To plot point B, start at the origin. Count 3 spaces right along the xaxis. Count 2 spaces down along the y-axis.

Practice 6
A. Write the ordered pair for each point.

1. Point A
2. Point B
3. Point C
4. Point D
5. Point E
6. Point F
7. Point G
8. Point H

B. Plot the points on the coordinate grid.
9. Plot the following points:
J at
K at (4, 0)

L at
M at

10. Plot the following points:
N at
O at
P at (3, 1)
Q at

C. Choose the one best answer to each question.
11. On the coordinate grid below, a line passes through points A and B.

Which of the following ordered pairs also lies on the line?
A. (1, 0)
B.
C.
D.

12. Two of the corners of a triangle are located at

and (2,

3). What is the location of the third corner as shown in the diagram
below?

A.
B.
C.
D.
Answers and explanations begin on page 678.

Lesson 7: Graphing a Line

Key Ideas
A linear equation has two variables, x and y.
When the solutions to a linear equation are graphed on a coordinate
grid, the graph forms a line.
To find a point on the line, substitute a value for x and solve for y.
You must solve for at least two points in order to draw the line.
Using the coordinate system, we can graph equations. When an equation has
only two variables, x and y, and neither is raised to an exponent, the graph of
the equation will be a line. When the graph of an equation is a straight line,
the equation is a linear equation.
To graph an equation, you need to solve for two points on the line.
Example 1: Graph the equation

.

Some linear equation problems don’t require you to draw a graph.

GED® TEST TIP
If a linear equation is not written with y on one side of the
equation, use inverse operations to isolate y. Example:
. Subtract 2x from each side.
.
Example 2: Point A lies at

on a coordinate grid. The graph of

which of the following equations passes through point A?
(1)
(2)
(3)
Use the ordered pair given in the problem. Substitute the x-coordinate, 5, for
x in each equation and solve for y. If

, the value of the y-

coordinate from the ordered pair, you have found the correct equation.
Option (2) is correct.

Practice 7
A. Fill in the y column in each table and graph the equation.

1.

2.

3.

4.

B. Choose the one best answer to each question.
Questions 5 and 6 refer to the following coordinate grid.

5. The graph of the equation

will pass through which of

the following pairs of points?
A. point S and
B. point S and
C. point T and (0, 0)
D. point T and
6. Line P is the graph of which of the following equations?
A.

B.
C.
D.
7. Point C is located at

. A graph of which of the following

equations would pass through point C?
A.
B.
C.
D.
Answers and explanations begin on page 678.

Lesson 8: Slope of a Line
Key Ideas
Slope is the ratio of rise to run.
Moving from left to right, a line that goes upward has a positive slope,
and a line that moves downward has a negative slope.
You can find slope by counting spaces and writing a ratio or by using
the slope formula.
Slope is the measurement of the steep-ness of a line. Imagine a road going up
a hill. If the road must climb upward over a short forward distance, the road
will be very steep. Slope measures the relation-ship between rise (how high
the road must climb) and run (the distance the road goes forward).

On a coordinate grid, a line that moves upward from left to right has a
positive slope. A line that moves downward from left to right has a negative
slope. You can find the slope of a line on a coordinate grid by writing the
ratio of rise to run.
Example 1: What is the slope of line P shown on the coordinate grid?

1. Find two points on line P. Count to find the rise and run. The line

moves up 1 space for every 2 spaces it goes to the right.
2. Write the ratio:

. The slope is

.

GED® TEST TIP
Think of the slope formula this way: write the difference of the
y’s over the difference of the x’s. Just make sure that you
always subtract the coordinates in the same order.
Example 2: What is the slope of line s shown on the coordinate grid?

1. Find any two points on line s. The line moves down 6 spaces (a
negative direction) and 2 spaces to the right.
2. Write the ratio:

The slope of line s is

.

.

You can also find slope using the slope formula on the GED® Formula
Sheet. The formula will appear as follows:
slope of a

, where

and

are

two points on a line.
Example 3: A line passes through points at coordinates (1, 4) and
. What is the slope of the line?

1. Choose one point to be

. The other will be

. It doesn’t matter which you choose. For this example,
and
.
2. Substitute the values into the slope formula and solve:

The slope is

.

Since the slope is positive, you know that the line rises from left to right. You
also know that it goes up 1 space for every 3 spaces it moves to the right.
In working with slope, there are a few special circumstances that you should
memorize. A horizontal line, just like a flat stretch of roadway, has a slope of
0. The slope of a vertical line is undefined; in other words, our definition of
slope will not work for a line that has no run at all.

Practice 8
A. Find the slope of each line.

1.

2.

3.

B. Use the slope formula to find the slope of a line that passes through
the following pairs of points.
4. (3, 5) and
5. (0, 2) and (4, 0)
6. (4, 2) and (2, 2)
7. (6, 1) and (0, 3)
8. (1, 4) and
9.

and (2, 4)

C. Choose the one best answer for each question.
Question 10 refers to the following graph.

10. Which of the following lines shown on the graph has a slope of
?
A. line A
B. line B
C. line C
D. line D
11. Line N passes through the following points: (0, 4), (1, 2), (2, 0), and
. What is the slope of line N?
A. −4
B. −2
C. 2
D. 4
12. Line L passes through point (1, 0) and has a slope of 3. Which of the
following points also lies on line L?

A. (0, 3)
B. (1, 3)
C. (2, 3)
D. (2, 5)
Answers and explanations begin on page 678.

Lesson 9: Slope and Equations
Key Ideas
There are two ways to find an equation if you are given the slope of a
line and a point.
One method is the slope-intercept form.
The other method is the point-slope form.

Use the Slope-Intercept Form to Find an Equation
Lesson 8 showed how to find the slope of a line and graph it. The examples
in this lesson show how you can use the slope and a point on the line to find
the equation of a line in two different forms. (You might also need to find the
equation of a line from two points. In this case, you would calculate the slope
first, then use the slope and one of the points to find the equation.)
The first of these forms is the slope-intercept form:
. In this
form of the equation, the variable m stands for the slope of the line. The
variable b stands for the y-intercept, which is the y-value at the point where
the line crosses the y-axis. The variables x and y are the x- and y-coordinates
of any point on the line and are usually written as an ordered pair.
Follow these steps to find the equation of a line in the slope-intercept form.

1. Substitute the values that you are given for the slope (m) and the x- and
y-coordinates (x, y) into the slope-intercept equation. Be careful not to
mix up x and y.
2. Use inverse operations to isolate b.
3. Rewrite the equation in slope-intercept form, leaving x and y as
variables and substituting values for m and b.

GED® TEST TIP
You can access both the slope-intercept form and the pointslope form from the online GED® Formula Sheet. Just click on
the word formula on the computer toolbar, and the sheet will
become available.
Example 1: Use the slope-intercept form to find the equation of a line that has
the slope m = 4 and passes through the point
.

1.
2.
3.

Use the Point-Slope Form to Find an Equation
The second important form that is used to describe a line on the
Mathematical Reasoning Test is the point-slope form:
. In this form,

is an ordered pair that

corresponds to a point on the line. As in the slope-intercept form, m stands
for the slope. If you simplify an equation in point-slope form by solving for y,
you will get the slope-intercept form of the equation.
Follow these steps to find the equation of a line in the point-slope form.
1. Call the point that you are given
2. Put the

and

.

values into the point-slope equation.

3. Put the slope value in the point-slope equation for m.
Example 2: Use the point-slope form to find the equation of the line that
passes through the point (4, 3) and has a slope of 2.

1.
2.
3.

Notice that you can simplify the equation to find the slope-intercept form:

Practice 9.1
A. Use the slope-intercept form,

, to find the

equation of the line that passes through the given point and has the
given slope.
1.
2.
3.
B. Use the point-slope form,
, to find the equation of
the line that passes through the given point and has the given slope.
4.
5.
6.
C. Find the equation of the line that passes through the given points.
Write your answer in slope-intercept form.
7.

8.
9.
D. Choose the one best answer for each question.
10. Which of the following is an equation for the line that passes through
and

?

A.
B.
C.
D.
11. Which of the following is an equation for the line that passes through
and (1, 4)?

A.
B.
C.
D.
12. Which of the following equations describes the same line as
?

A.
B.
C.
D.
13. Question 13 refers to the following graph.

13. Which of the following equations correctly describes the line on
the graph?
14.
15.
16.

17.
Answers and explanations start on page 679.

Slope and Unit Rate
The unit rate is a way of showing the relationship between two variables as
the ratio of how many units of one quantity there are per one unit of the other
quantity. Unit rates are used constantly in everyday life, as well as in
business, science, and the trades. On a given day, you might go to the butcher
for a cut of meat that costs $2.89 per pound; merge onto a highway where
you increase your speed to 55 miles per hour; and compare LED and
fluorescent light bulbs at the hardware store, seeing that the fluorescents use
an extra 1.8 kJ of electricity per hour.

Key Ideas
The slope of a line is equivalent to rate when the slope is written as a
whole number (e.g., 55 miles per hour) or decimal (e.g., $2.89 per
pound).
Rate is usually written as number of units of quantity y per one unit of
quantity x. This value is called the unit rate.
It is possible to determine rate with just one value each for the y and x
variables when you know that when the x value is 0, the y value is also 0
(e.g., if you buy zero apples, you pay zero dollars).
Each of these everyday ratios compares two quantities, and the second
quantity given (per this) is what would be represented by the x-axis of a
graph. The unit rate, the quantity of y per one unit of x, is the same as the
slope of a line representing the relationship, calculated in the previous lesson
as

, with one difference. The unit rate is typically expressed in whole

numbers or decimals rather than left in fraction form.

Example 1: The coordinate grid shows the cost of gas at a particular station.
Avery and Beatrix partially filled two jerry cans, separately, and later
graphed the values from their receipts to determine the relationship
between cost (y) and gallons of gas purchased (x). Determine the cost
of gas from the coordinate grid.

1. Count to find the rise and run between the two given points. The line
moves up 5 when it moves 2 to the right.
2. Write the ratio:
the ratio is

. (This is the same as saying that
.)

3. Interpret the meaning of the rate as determined by the slope: the cost of
gas at this station is $2.50 per gallon.

GED® TEST TIP
To determine rate, just take the fraction that represents slope
and divide the numerator (top number) by the denominator
(bottom number). Either version of the slope formula,

or

, may be used to determine rate.

NOTE: You may have noticed that in this example, you can get the same
answer by just dividing 7.5 by 3, or 12.5 by 5. This works because there is an
implied third point in this proportional relationship: when you buy 0 gallons
of gas, the cost is 0 dollars, meaning

.

Example 2: A technology company follows a predictable pricing trend, where
the price of a new product decreases linearly over time. The company
releases a new smart phone at a retail price of $680. The following
graph shows the cost of the phone for the next five years it is on the
market as cost (y) versus time in years (x).

Determine the rate at which the discount in pricing occurs.
1. Choose any two points and use the formula for slope of a line,
, to find the rate. For this example, you could
choose

and

.

2. Substitute the values into the slope formula and solve, remembering to
reduce to a whole number or decimal rather than leaving the slope as a
fraction:

3. Interpret the meaning of the rate as determined by the slope. The smart
phone model drops in price by $55 every year it is on the market.
Example 3: A Minnesota construction company orders limestone, sand, and
topsoil from a Canadian company, which uses the metric system. The
purchasing officer knows that there are 2.2 lb per 1 kg of material. He
decides to make a graph for reference when making purchases.
Typically he’ll buy 100 kg, 500 kg, or 1000 kg of materials at a time.
What will the graph look like?
1. The material weighs 2.2 lbs per 1 kg. Use the metric kilogram
measurements as x values and the corresponding imperial pound
measurements as y values. For 100 kg, 2.2(100) = 220 lb. For 500 kg,
2.2(500) = 1100 lb. For 1000 kg, 2.2(1000) = 2200 lb.
2. Plot the points on a graph.

Note that the slope of the line connecting the dots is 2.2, representing the unit
conversion rate of 2.2 lb per kg. The purchasing officer could use the graph
or the equation of the line to find the weight in pounds of nonstandard orders.

Practice 9.2
A. Use the slope formula to find the rates that correspond to the
numbers in these scenarios.
1. A catering company orders 150 lb of fresh clams for a banquet
serving 100 people, and 30 lb of clams for a dinner party of 20
people. Determine the standard number of pounds of clams per
serving.
2. A painter uses 15 gallons of interior paint to cover 300 square yards
of wall and ceiling space. On a different job, he uses 8 gallons to
cover 160 square yards. No paint is left over on either job. How
many gallons of paint are needed to cover 1 square yard?
3. A scientist is looking for the relationship between the x and y
variables in an experiment, and she collects the following data: (3,
2.4), (8, 6.4), (9, 7.2). Determine the rate of quantity y per unit of
quantity x.
B. Given the rate, draw a graph showing the relationship between the
following quantities.
4. Oranges are on sale for $0.44 per pound. Draw a graph of cost (y) per
weight of oranges (x).

5. A vintage vinyl record player spins at a rate of 78 rpm (revolutions per
minute). Draw a graph of number of revolutions (y) per time (x),
plotting points for a 3-minute, 4-minute, and 5-minute record.

C. Given the following graphs, determine the rates.
Question 6 refers to the following graph.

6. A telemarketing company tracks its employees’ efficiency. Use the
graph to find the rate of calls made per hour of work.
A. 0.055 calls per hr
B. 17.25 calls per hr
C. 18.25 calls per hr
D. 69 calls per hr
Question 7 refers to the following graph.

7. On three carpet installation jobs, a contractor records the values above
with the goal of analyzing whether her rates are high enough given the
time it takes her to install carpet. It takes her 1 hour to collect tools and
drive to a worksite. The x-axis shows square yards of carpet, and the yaxis shows hours spent. What is her rate of time per area installed?
A. 0.0125 hr per sq yd
B. 0.01625 hr per sq yd
C. 0.0375 hr per sq yd
D. 80 hr per sq yd
Answers and explanations begin on page 679.

Lesson 10: Systems of Linear Equations
Key Ideas
There are several ways to solve a system of linear equations.
One method is to graph the equations to see the point of intersection.
Another method is to find one value (x or y) and substitute it into the
other equation to find the solution.

Graph to Solve the System of Equations

The equations in Lessons 7 and 9 are linear equations: they have two
variables, x and y, and represent straight lines in the coordinate plane. Two or
more linear equations make up a system of linear equations. Solving a
system of two equations means finding the values of both variables. The
solution will give the x- and y-coordinates of the point at which the two lines
intersect. You can express this solution as an ordered pair: (x, y).
One way to solve a system of equations is by graphing each equation using a
T-chart—like those that you filled in for the Lesson 7 practice. Graphing a
system of linear equations provides a picture of the intersection. Follow these
steps to solve a system of equations by graphing.
1. Set up an x and y T-chart for each equation. Find two ordered pairs for
and find y and then use

each equation: use

and

find x.
2. Graph both lines, using the ordered pairs that you generated in step 1.
3. Find the point of intersection and express it in the form (x, y).

GED® TEST TIP
You may be asked whether a point is a solution to a system of
equations, and you can use either of the methods shown here to
find the answer.
Example 1: Graph the equations

and

to find the solution.
1.
x
0

y
4

2

0

x
0

y
7
0

2.

3. The point of intersection—that is, the solution—is (1, 2).

Substitute to Solve the System of Equations

You can also use substitution to solve a system of linear equations. Follow
these steps to solve a system of linear equations by substitution.
Example 2: Solve the equations

and

by substitution.
1. Solve the first equation so that y is expressed in terms of x.

2. Substitute that value of y into the second equation and solve for x.

3. Substitute that value of x into the first equation and solve for y.
The solution is (1, 2).

Practice 10
A. Find two pairs of coordinates for each equation by making a T-chart.
Use the coordinates to graph the lines and find the solution.

1.

2.

B. Find the solution for the two equations by substitution. Express as an
ordered pair in the form (x, y).

3.

4.

5.

6.

C. Choose the one best answer for each question.
7. Where does the line with the equation
line with the equation

intersect with the

?

A.
B.
C.
D.
8. Where does the line with the equation
line with the equation

intersect with the

?

A.
B.
C. (0, 0)
D. (1, 0)
9. Where does the line with the equation
line with the equation
?

intersect with the

A.

B.

C.

D.

10. Which of the following is the equation of a line that intersects
?
A.
B.
C.
D.
Answers and explanations start on page 679.

Lesson 11: Patterns and Functions
Key Ideas
A pattern is a sequence of numbers determined by a mathematical rule.

A function is a rule that shows how one set of numbers is related to
another set of numbers.
To use a function, substitute values for variables and solve.
A pattern is a series of numbers or objects whose sequence is determined by
a particular rule. You can figure out what rule has been used by studying the
terms you are given. Think: What operation or sequence of operations will
always result in the next term in the series? Once you know the rule, you can
continue the pattern.
Example 1: Find the seventh term in the sequence: 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, . . .
1. Determine the rule. Each number in the sequence is two times the
number before it.
2. Apply the rule. You have been given five terms and must find the
seventh. Continue the pattern. The sixth term is
and the seventh term is

,

.

A function is a rule that shows how the terms in one sequence of numbers
are related to the terms in another sequence. Each distinct number entered
into the function produces a unique output. For example, a sidewalk vendor
charges $1.50 for a slice of pizza. The chart below shows how much it would
cost to buy one to six slices.
Number of
Pizza Slices

1

2

3

4

5

6

Cost

$1.50

$3.00 $4.50 $6.00 $7.50 $9.00

Each number in the first row corresponds to a price in the second row. We could say that the amount a customer will pay is a function of (or depends
upon) the number of slices the customer orders. This function could be
written:

GED® TEST TIP
To figure out what rule has been used to form a pattern, begin
by finding the difference between each term and the term that
follows it in the sequence.
.
If you know the function and a number in the first set of numbers, you can
solve for its corresponding number in the second set.
Example 2: Using the function
when

, what is the value of y

?

1. Substitute the given value of x.

2. Solve for y.

Example 3: Using the function
when

?

, what is the value of n

1. Substitute the given value of m.

2. Solve for n.

Practice 11
A. Solve.
1. Which number should come next in the following pattern?
, ________
2. What is the next number in the sequence?
21, 26, 31, 36, ________
3. In the function

, if

, what is

, if

, what is

the value of y?
4. In the function

the value of y?
5. Each term in the second row is determined by the function
.
x

1

2

3

4

5

...

y

1

3

5

7

9

...

12

What number belongs in the shaded box?
6. In the function

, if

,

what is the value of y?
7. What is the next term in the pattern below?
1000, 500, 250, 125, 62.5, ________
8. What is the next number in the sequence?
3,

, 7,

, 11, ________

9. Each term in the second row is determined by the function
.
x

-2

-1

0

1

2

...

y

-1

2

5

8

11

...

9

What number belongs in the shaded box?
10. In the function

, if

the value of y?
B. Choose the one best answer to each question.
Question 11 refers to the following drawing.

, what is

11. How many blocks would be needed to build the 25th construction in
the sequence?
A. 47
B. 49
C. 51
D. 55
12. What is the sixth term in the sequence below?
...
A. 10
B. 14
C. 16
D. 22
13. The price per scarf is a function of the number of scarves purchased.
The table shows the price per scarf for purchases of up to four scarves.
Number (n) of
Scarves

1

2

3

4

Cost (c) per Scarf

$5.00

$4.75 $4.50 $4.25

Which of the following functions was used to determine the prices

shown in the table?
A.
B.
C.
D.
14. Which of the following sequences of values of y could be created
using the function
A. 1, 4, 7, 10, 13, . . .
B. 1, 5, 9, 13, 17, . . .
C. 1, 4, 8, 13, 19, . . .
D.

...

Answers and explanations begin on page 680.

Lesson 12: Function Applications
Key Ideas
Functions are used to make many common work calculations.
FUNCTIONS CAN BE USED TO MAKE COMPARISONS.
TO USE A FUNCTION, YOU MUST KNOW THE MEANING OF
THE VARIABLES. THIS INFORMATION SHOULD BE GIVEN IN
THE TEXT OF THE PROBLEM.
Functions are used in many business applications. For instance, they can be
used to calculate profit, cost, employee wages, and taxes. On the
Mathematical Reasoning Test, you will read about common work and life
situations. The problems may contain or describe a function that you can use

to solve the problem.
Example 1: Celino Advertising is finishing a series of print ads for a client.
Finishing the project will cost $2000 per day for the first seven days and
$3500 per day after seven days. The finishing costs for a project taking
longer than 7 days can be found using the function
, where
finishing the project and

cost of

number of days. If the project takes

12 days to complete, what will the project cost?
Use the function to solve the problem.

You may be asked to use functions to make comparisons.
Example 2: Nita decides to join a health club. She gets brochures from two
health clubs and compares the plans. Healthstars Fitness charges a
one-time membership fee of $250 and $8 per month. Freedom Health
Center charges $25 per month. At both health clubs, the price (P)
Nita will pay is a function of the number of months (m) she attends
the club. The functions are as follows:

GED® TEST TIP

There is often more than one way to work a problem, even
when a function is given. Solve using the function. If you see
another way to solve the problem, use it to check your answer.
Healthstars Fitness
Freedom Health Center
Nita plans to move in 18 months. If she attends a health club until she moves,
which one offers the better price?
1. Find the price at Healthstars Fitness:

2. Find the price at Freedom Health Center:

3. Compare the results. Even though Nita will have to pay a large amount
up front, Healthstars Fitness offers the better price.

Practice 12
A. Solve. You MAY use a calculator.

1. The Chimney Sweep charges $25 for a chimney inspection. If the
customer purchases additional services, $15 of the inspection fee is
deducted. Let
cost of any additional services. The total
cost (C) of an inspection and services can be determined by the
function
where s is not 0.
a. Jan has her chimney inspected and purchases a smoke guard for
$89. How much will she be charged?
b. After an inspection, Ahmed decides to have a new damper
installed for $255. How much will he pay?
2. Ricardo does a great deal of driving for his work. He generally
estimates his driving time in hours (t) using the function
, where

number of miles.

a. How many hours will it take Ricardo to drive 330 miles?
b. How many hours will it take Ricardo to drive 255 miles?
3. A customer’s phone charges are a function of the number of
minutes of long-distance calls made. The graph shows a comparison
of two plans available.

a. Michelle looks at her previous phone bills and finds that she
makes about 350 minutes of long-distance calls per month.
Which plan is better for her?
b. Craig usually makes about 150 minutes of long-distance calls
per month. Which plan is better for him?
B. Choose the one best answer to each question. You MAY use a
calculator.
Questions 4 and 5 refer to the following information.
Alicia is considering three job opportunities. At all three jobs, weekly pay
(P) is a function of the number of hours (h) worked during the week. The
functions are shown below:
Job 1
Job 2

Job 3
4. If Alicia works 30 hours in a week, how much more will she earn at
Job 2 than at Job 1?
A. $5.33
B. $29.50
C. $40.50
D. $59.00
5. If Alicia works 40 hours per week, which of the following is a true
statement?
A. Alicia will earn the least at Job 3.
B. Job 1 will pay more than Job 3.
C. Job 3 will pay more than Job 2.
D. Alicia will earn the most at Job 2.
6. A company is awarded a $95,000 job that will cost $5,400 per day in
expenses. Profits (P) can be calculated using
,
where

.What is the company’s profit if the job takes 14

days to complete?
A. $10,800
B. $19,400
C. $66,100
D. $75,600
Answers and explanations begin on page 680.

Lesson 13: Function Notation
Functions can be written with function notation. Take the function in
Example 1 of the previous lesson: C = $2000d + $1500(d − 7), where C = the

cost of finishing a project and d = the number of days the project takes. In
function notation, the cost would be written as f(d) instead of C, so the
function is written as follows: f(d) = $2000d + $1500(d − 7). The notation
f(d) is interpreted as “the function of d” or “f of d.”
The domain of a function is the set of values for which the function is
defined or makes sense. In the above example, the domain is all the values
that d can take. Since d is an amount of time, it cannot be negative.
Furthermore, in this case if d < 7, then the function begins to subtract from
the $2000 a day cost for finishing the project, which does not make sense (as
explained in the example, $2000/day is the rate for the first seven days, and
additional days cost even more; no days cost less than $2000). Thus, the
domain of f(d) is d ≤ 7.
Take a look at the following example involving a quadratic expression.

Key Ideas
In function notation, the result of the function is expressed in terms of
the variable in the function, for example, f(x) = x + 4.
The domain of a function is the set of valid input values, or those values
of the variable for which the function is defined.
The range of a function is the set of output values that it can generate,
given the values in its domain.
Example 1: What is the domain of

?

1. The domain is the set of values that x can take on to produce a defined
value for f(x). Division by zero is undefined.
2. Calculate the values of x that produce a denominator of zero.

3. The domain is all real numbers not equal to −1 or 1.

The range of a function is the set of outputs or results of the function. Look
again at the example f(d) = $2000d + $1500(d − 7). When d is as small as
possible—that is, when d = 7—then f(d) = $2000 × 7 + $1500(7 − 7) =
$14,000. There is no upper limit to how many days a job could take, so there
is no upper limit to the cost or to f(d). Thus, the range of f(d) is numbers
greater than or equal to 14,000.

GED® TEST TIP
Sometimes you may be given a function and an input value and
be asked to solve for the output, and sometimes you may be
given the output and be asked to solve for the input. In either
case, the question will always provide enough information to
figure out what the function is.
Example 2: What is the range of f(x)= x2 ?
1. First, determine the domain of this function. Any number can be
squared, so the domain is all values of x.
2. Find the minimum value of f(x). A squared real number is never
negative. When x = 0, f(x) = 0 and that is the function’s minimum
value.
3. Find the maximum value of f(x). As x moves away from zero, whether
in a positive or negative direction, f(x) takes on a greater positive value.
There is no limit on how large f(x) can be. Thus, the range of f(x) is
numbers greater than or equal to zero.
Note that sometimes graphing a function is very helpful to find its domain
and range.
A question could give you the value of a function and ask what value(s) of
the variable would produce that result.
Example 3: Rafael enjoys baking cookies with his nieces and nephews. For
every cup of oats, they can make 24 oatmeal cookies. If they made

180 oatmeal cookies today, how many cups of oats did they use?
1. Write the function.
f(c) = 24c, where c is the number of cups of oats and f(c) is the number
of cookies.
2. Substitute the value of the outcome for f(c).
180 = 24c
3. Solve for c.

Rafael and his family used 7.5 cups of oats to make the cookies.

Practice 13
A. Find the domain and range of the following functions.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
B. Solve.
7. Carla’s daughter is participating in a summer reading program at the
library. She is reading two books a week. Which of the following
functions expresses her summer reading, where w is the number of
weeks in the program?
A. f(w) = w + 2
B. f(w) = 2w
C. f(w) = 2b

D. 2f(w) = w
8. Bryan is on a road trip with his best friend, and they like to get up
early. Each day, they drive 100 miles before breakfast, and then they
drive an average of 60 miles per hour for each hour they are on the
road until they stop for the day. They never spend more than 8 hours
on the road after breakfast. If h is the number of hours they drive after
breakfast, which of the following are the domain and range of the
function that represents their daily driving?
A. Domain is 0 ≤ h ≤ 8; range is 100 ≤ f(h) ≤ 580.
B. Domain is 100 ≤ h ≤ 580; range is 0 ≤ f(h) ≤ 8.
C. Domain is h ≤ 0; range is f(h) ≤ 100.
D. Domain is h ≤ 8; range is 60 ≤ f(h) ≤ 100.
Answers and explanations begin on page 681.

Equations, Inequalities, and Functions
Practice Questions
Directions: You MAY use your calculator.
1. Which of the following expressions is equal to 6 − 4(x + 3)?
A. 4x + 3
B. 4x − 9
C. −4x − 3
D. −4x − 6
2. Three increased by the product of 4 and a number is equal to the same
number decreased by 6. What is the number?
A. −3
B. −1
C. 1
D. 3

3. What is the equation of a line with a slope of -4 that passes through the
point (1, 2)?
A. y = −4x + 2
B. y = −4x + 6
C. y = 4x + 1
D. y = 4x + 6
4. The ordered pair (−2, −1) is a solution to which of the following
equations?
A. −4x − y = 7
B. 4x + y = −7
C. 4x − y = −7
D. −4x + y = −7
5. For a two-week period, Jan earned $150 less than twice Tom’s
earnings. Together Jan and Tom earned $1380. How much did Tom
earn?
A. $720
B. $660
C. $510
D. $360
Questions 6 and 7 refer to the following graph.

6. If the graph of the equation y = −x −5 were drawn on the grid, which of
the points would be on the line?
A. A
B. B
C. C
D. D
7. If a line were drawn through points B and C, what would be the slope of
the line?
A. −3
B.
C.
D. 3
8. Samuel is paid $350 per month plus a 10 percent commission on his total
sales for the month. If he needs to earn at least $2100 per month, which of
the following expressions represents the total sales for the month (s)
Samuel needs to achieve?
A. s ≥ $17,500
B. s ≤ $17,500
C. s ≤ $21,000
D. s ≥ $21,000

9. For its Checking Plus account, a bank charges $3.95 per month plus $0.10
for each check written after the first ten checks written that month. The
function to find the total monthly fee (F) is F = $3.95 + $0.10(n-10),
where n = number of checks written.
Greg writes 24 checks in March. How much will he pay in fees for the
month?
A. $6.35
B. $5.35
C. $2.40
D. $1.40
10. The sum of four consecutive odd numbers is 104. What is the largest
number?
A. 23
B. 25
C. 27
D. 29
11. Which value for x makes the inequality x > 400 true?
A. 73
B. 44
C. 36
D. 63
12. Four less than the product of a number (x) and 5 is equal to 8 more than
the sum of 2 and the product of 3 and the number. Which of these
equations could be used to find the value of x?
A. 4−5x = 8 + 2+ 3x
B. 5x−4 = 8 + 2 + 3x
C. 5x = 4−8 + 2 + 3x
D. 5x − 4 = 8 + 2 + 3
13. What is the slope of a line that passes through the points (2, 4) and (4, 6)?

A. −2
B. 1
C. 2
D. 4
14. What is the next number in the sequence?
1, 7, 14, 22, . . .
A. 30
B. 31
C. 32
D. 33
15. What is the y-intercept of the line with a slope of 2 that passes through the
point (1, 2)?
A. −2
B.
C. 0
D.
16. The graphs of the equations y = x + 3 and y = −2x −3 are drawn on a
coordinate grid.
In the coordinate plane below, darken the circle corresponding to the
point at which the two lines intersect.

17. Which of the following shows the product of −7 and x decreased by the
sum of 8 and y?
A. −7x −(8 + y)
B. −7x −8 + y
C. (8 + y) −7x
D. (7 + x) −(8 + y)
18. What are the possible solutions for the quadratic equation x2 −5x = 24?
A. −8 and 3
B. −6 and 4
C. 8 and −3
D. 4 and −6
19. Cynthia is 6 times as old as Rebecca. In 6 years, Cynthia will be only 3
times as old as Rebecca. How old is Rebecca now?
A. 3
B. 4
C. 8
D. 12
20. The graph of which equation will pass through points (0, −3) and (5, 7)?

A.
B. y = 2x − 3
C. y = 2x + 7
D. y = −2x + 3
21. Which of the following graphs represents the solution set of the inequality
−2(x −6)>8 ?

Questions 22 and 23 refer to the following graph.

22. Which of the following ordered pairs shows the location of point L?
A. (−5,−1)
B. (−5, 1)
C. (−1, 5)
D. (1,−5)
23. What is the slope of the line that passes through points L and M?

24. Bob, Celia, Sam, and Daniel contributed money to buy their boss a
retirement gift. Sam and Daniel each gave the same amount of money.
Celia gave $12 more than Daniel. Bob gave half as much as Celia gave. If
the four workers gave a total of $81, how much did Sam give?
A. $9
B. $15
C. $18
D. $21
25. What is the solution set of the inequality −7x − 4 ≥ x −28
A. x ≤ 3
B. x ≥ 3
C. x ≤ 3
D. x ≤ −4
26. A line goes through the points (0, 2) and (1, 3). What is the equation of
the line?
A.
B.
C. y = x +2
D. y = x +3
27. In a recent election, Perez got 5512 more votes than of the leading
candidate’s votes. Together the two candidates received 18,072 votes.
How many people voted for Perez?
A. 6,024
B. 8,652
C. 9,420

D. 12,560
28. What is the value of x in the equation −4(x + 2) −10 = 5x?
A. x = −18
B. x = −2
C. x = 2
D. x =18
29. Marcia counts the $5 bills and $10 bills in her cash register drawer. She
counts a total of 35 bills with a total value of $240. If x = the number of
$5 bills in the drawer, which of the following equations could be used to
find the number of $5 bills in the drawer?
A. $5x + $10x = 35
B. $5x + $10x + 35= $240
C. $5(35−x) + $10x = $240
D. $5x + $10(35 − x) = $240
30. The sum of five consecutive numbers is 370. What is the fourth number
in the sequence?
A. 73
B. 74
C. 75
D. 76
31. A baseball pitcher’s earned run average (E) is a function of the number of
earned runs (r) given up and innings pitched (i). The function is written
. What is the earned run average of a pitcher who gives up 8 runs
in 18 innings?
Write your answer on the line below.
32. Point B is located halfway between (−1, 5) and (−1, −3). Name the
location of point B.
In the coordinate plane below, darken the circle corresponding to the

location of point B.

Answers and explanations begin on page 681.

CHAPTER 7

Geometry
Lesson 1: Plane Figures
Key Ideas
Plane figures are classified by the properties of their sides and angles.
The sum of the interior angles of any four-sided plane figure is 360°.
By using the properties of any four-sided plane figure and algebraic
reasoning, you can find missing angle measures.

Four-Sided Plane Figures
A plane figure is a set of line segments, all lying on a single plane. To
prepare for the GED® Mathematical Reasoning Test, learn the properties of
each shape. You will need to identify the characteristics of different types of
four-sided plane figures and draw conclusions about their angles and sides.
You are already familiar with rectangles and squares. A rectangle is a foursided figure with four right angles. The opposite sides (sides across from each

other) are the same length, and they are parallel.
Sides with the same markings are equal.

A square is actually a kind of rectangle. It, too, has four right angles with
parallel opposite sides. However, a square has one additional property: its
four sides are all the same length.

A parallelogram is a four-sided figure whose opposite sides are parallel and
the same length. In addition, its opposite angles (the angles diagonally across
from each other) are also equal in measure. A special parallelogram, called a
rhombus (not shown), has four sides of equal length.

A trapezoid is a four-sided figure with exactly one pair of parallel sides. The
definition of a trapezoid does not dictate the measure of the angles or the
lengths of the sides.

GED® TEST TIP
Don’t rely on sight alone to identify a geometric figure. Read
carefully to see which properties are given. Then identify the
figure based on the properties.
All four-sided plane figures have one important property in common. The
sum of the measures of the interior angles is 360°. You can use this fact to
find a missing angle measure.
Example: In figure ABCD, the opposite sides are parallel. What is the
measure of ∠A?
1. Identify the figure. The notation on the drawing tells you that the
opposite sides are equal in measure. Since they are also parallel, the
figure is a parallelogram.

2. Find the measure of ∠C. The opposite angles of a parallelogram are

equal in measure; therefore, m∠C = m∠B. Both ∠B and ∠C
measure 110°.
3. Find the measure of ∠A. You know the measures of ∠A and ∠D are
equal and that the sum of all four angles equals 360°. Let x = m∠A.
Therefore, 2x = the sum of m∠A and m∠D. Write an equation and
solve.

The measure of ∠A is 70°.

Practice 1
A. List the names of four-sided plane figures introduced on page 388 that
can exhibit the following properties. Write None if no four-sided
plane figure has the given property.
1. four right angles
2. opposite sides are equal in length
3. exactly one pair of parallel sides
4. all angles are equal in measure
5. only three right angles
6. opposite angles are equal in measure
7. all four sides are equal in length
8. sum of interior angles is 360°
9. sides are all of different lengths
10. four equal angles and four equal sides
B. Choose the one best answer to each question.
Questions 11 and 12 refer to the following figure.

11. Angle F is 20° more than three times the measure of ∠H. What is the
measure of ∠F?
A. 40°
B. 120°
C. 140°
D. 180°
12. In order for figure EFGH to be a trapezoid, which of the following
must be a true statement?
A. EF is the same length as FH.
B. EF∥GH.
C. m∠F = m∠H.
D. m∠G = m∠F.
Question 13 refers to the following figure.

13. If the opposite sides in figure RSUT are parallel, what is the measure of
∠R?
A. 5°
B. 20°
C. 90°
D. 270°

14. A four-sided plane figure has sides measuring 10, 15, 10, and 15. The
opposite angles are equal, but there are no right angles. What is the
figure?
A. rhombus
B. rectangle
C. parallelogram
D. trapezoid
Answers and explanations begin on page 682.

Lesson 2: Triangles
Key Ideas
Triangles are named by their vertices.
They are classified in two ways: by their side lengths and by their
angle measures.
The sum of the interior angles of any triangle is 180°.

The Properties of Triangles
A triangle is a closed three-sided plane figure. From the definition, we can
infer other properties. Since a triangle has three sides, it must also have three
interior angles and three vertices.
A triangle is named by writing its vertices in any order. The triangle shown at
right could be named ∆DEF. Its sides are DE, EF, and DF.

Triangles can be classified by the lengths of their sides and by the measures
of their angles. In the figures below, sides with the same
number of marks are equal.
Classified by Side Lengths
equilateral triangle
All sides are equal in length. Note that the angles also are equal.

isosceles triangle
Exactly two sides are equal in length. Note that the two angles opposite these
sides are equal.

scalene triangle
No sides are equal in length, and no angles are equal.

Classified by Angle Measures
right triangle
One angle measures 90°.

acute triangle
All angles measure less than 90°.

obtuse triangle
One angle is greater than 90°.

Each triangle can be classified in two ways.

GED® TEST TIP

Classify triangles by their properties, not by how they look. For
example, the triangle in Example 1 may not immediately look
like a right triangle because the right angle is at the top.
Example 1: What kind of triangle is ∆PQR?
1. Classify by its sides: Two sides have the same length, so ∆PQR is an
isosceles triangle.

2. Classify by its angles: ∠P is a right angle, so ∆PQR is a right triangle.
∆PQR is a right isosceles triangle.
The sum of the measures of the interior angles of any triangle is 180°. We
can use this fact to solve for a missing angle.
Example 2: In ∆ABC, ∠A measures 55° and ∠B measures 100°. What is the
measure of ∠C?

Write an equation and solve.

The measure of ∠C is 25°.

Practice 2
A. Classify each triangle in two ways.

1.

2.

3.

B. Find the measure of the unknown angle in each triangle.

4.

5.

6.

C. Choose the one best answer to each question.
Questions 7 and 8 refer to the following figure.

7. If ∠DAB measures 115° and ∠DCB measures 95°, what is the length
of side AC in centimeters? (Hint: Use the facts in the problem to find
m∠BAC and m∠BCA.)
A. 6
B. 8
C. 14
D. 22
8. What kind of triangle is ∆ACD?
A. isosceles
B. acute
C. right
D. obtuse
9. One angle in a scalene triangle measures 38°, and another angle
measures 56°. What is the measure of the third angle?
A. 38°
B. 56°
C. 86°
D. 124°
Answers and explanations begin on page 682.

Lesson 3: Pythagorean Relationship
Key Ideas
The hypotenuse is the longest side of a right triangle. It is found
opposite the right angle.
The sum of the squares of the legs of a right triangle equals the square
of the hypotenuse.

As you know, a right triangle has one right angle. The side directly across
from the right angle, called the hypotenuse, is the longest side of the right
triangle. The remaining sides, the line segments forming the right angle, are
the legs of the triangle.
Thousands of years ago, people found a special relationship, called the
Pythagorean relationship, among the sides of a right triangle. You can use
this relationship to find the measure of any side of a right triangle if the other
two side measures are known.
Pythagorean relationship
hypotenuse of a right triangle

; a and b are legs, and c is the

In other words, the square of the hypotenuse is equal to the sum of the
squares of the two legs of the right triangle.
Example 1: What is the length of the hypotenuse
of the right triangle shown in the diagram?

1. The lengths of the legs are 3 ft and 4 ft. Let one leg equal a and the
other equal b.
2. Solve for c. Substitute the values.

3. When one side of an equation equals a squared variable, isolate the
variable by finding the square root of both sides.
The length of the hypotenuse is 5 feet.

GED® TEST TIP
Watch for right triangles with sides in a 3-4-5 or 5-12-13 ratio.
These triangles often appear on math tests because the
measures of the sides are all whole numbers.
The Pythagorean relationship can also be used to solve for the length of a leg.
Example 2: If John places a 13-foot ladder 3 feet from the base of a wall, how
far up the wall will the ladder reach to the nearest tenth of a foot?
The wall, ground, and ladder form a right triangle. The hypotenuse is 13 ft in
length. One leg is 3 ft. You need to find the length of the other leg.

The ladder will extend 12.6 feet up the wall.
NOTE: Most of the time, you will need to use your calculator for the final
step when using the Pythagorean relationship. To find the square root of 160
on the TI-30XS MultiViewTM calculator, press:
(use ◀▶ to
convert the result from a radical to a decimal format).
Some right triangles display special proportions, which are worth
memorizing.
A right triangle whose angles are 45°, 45°, and 90° displays the
following relationship: leg : leg : hypotenuse = x : x : x
.
A right triangle whose angles are 30°, 60°, and 90° displays the
following relationship: leg : leg : hypotenuse = x : x
: 2x.

Practice 3
A. The lengths of two sides of a right triangle are given. Find the length
of the remaining side to the nearest tenth unit. You MAY use a
calculator.
1. leg a: 8 in.
leg b: 8 in.
hypotenuse c: ? in.
2. leg a: 9 yd
leg b: 12 yd
hypotenuse c: ? yd
3. leg a: 1.5 cm
leg b: 2 cm
hypotenuse c: ? cm
4. leg a: ? m
leg b: 3 m
hypotenuse c: 6 m
5. leg a: 6 mm
leg b: ? mm

hypotenuse c: 10 mm
6. leg a: ? ft
leg b: 5 ft
hypotenuse c: 18 ft
7. leg a: 7 cm
leg b: 10 cm
hypotenuse c: ? cm
8. leg a: 15 in.
leg b: ? in.
hypotenuse c: 30 in.
9. leg a: 4 km
leg b: 5 km
hypotenuse c: ? km
B. Choose the one best answer to each question.
10. On a coordinate plane, points a, B, and C can be connected to form a
right triangle.

What is the distance from a to C, to the nearest tenth of a unit? (Hint:
Count units to find the lengths of the sides and use the Pythagorean
relationship to find the distance between the points.)
A. 5.2
B. 6.7
C. 8.4
D. 10.1

11. The two shorter sides of a right triangle measure 18 ft and 24 ft. What
is the measure in feet of the third side?
A. 25
B. 28
C. 30
D. 42
12. Jan has built a rectangular frame out of wood to use for the bottom of
a platform. He wants to add a diagonal brace as shown in the drawing
below.

What will the length of the brace be, to the nearest tenth of a foot?
A. 16.0
B. 13.7
C. 12.8
D. 12.1
13. The hypotenuse of a right triangle measures 39 inches. If one leg
measures
15 inches, what is the measure of the other leg, in inches?
A. 36
B. 24
C. 18
D. 12
Answers and explanations begin on page 683.

Lesson 4: Perimeter and Area
Key Ideas
Perimeter is the distance around a figure.
Area is the measure of the space inside a flat figure. It is measured in
square units.
You need to memorize the formulas on this page except those for area
of a parallelogram and area of a trapezoid.

Perimeter is the distance around a figure. To find perimeter, simply add the
lengths of the sides. For common figures, you can apply a formula to find the
perimeter. You need to memorize these formulas.
square

Perimeter = 4 × side

P = 4s

rectangle

Perimeter = 2 ×
length + 2 × width

P = 2l + 2w

triangle

Perimeter = side1 +
side2 + side3

P=a+b+c

Example 1: A rectangle is 16 inches long and 9 inches wide. What is the
perimeter of the rectangle?
Use the formula:

Area is the measure of the space inside a flat figure. Area is measured in
square units. For example, if the sides of a figure are measured in inches, its
area will be measured in square inches. The formulas for finding area are

shown below.

Three of the formulas mention two new measures: base and height. The base
is one side of the figure. The height is the length from the vertex to the base,
forming a right angle to the base.

GED® TEST TIP
Several area formulas appear on the GED® formula sheet. You
can check there if you don’t remember a specific formula on
test day. However, memorizing the most common ones
(rectangle, triangle, and circle) will likely save you time as
you’re testing.
Example 2: Find the area of figure ABCD.

1. Identify the figure. ABCD is a parallelogram.
2. Find the facts you need. To use the formula for finding the area of a
parallelogram, you need to know the height and the length of the base.
Ignore the length of side BD.

3. Use the formula Area = base × height.

Practice 4
A. Find the area and perimeter of each figure.

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

B. Choose the one best answer to each question.
Question 7 refers to the following figure.

7. What is the area in square inches of the shaded portion of the
rectangle?
A. 38
B. 40
C. 56

D. 88
8. The four sides of a retangle measure 9 feet, 6 feet, 9 feet, and 6 feet.
What is the area of the retangle in square feet?
A. 30
B. 36
C. 54
D. 81
9. Martin is building a rectangular patio centered on one side of his yard.
The rest of his yard, shown in the diagram, is planted in grass.

If the measurements in the diagram are in feet, what is the square
footage of the grass portion of Martin’s yard?
A. 108
B. 162
C. 324
D. 432
10. A square measures 6 centimeters on one side. What is the perimeter of
the square in centimeters?
A. 12
B. 24
C. 36
D. 216
Answers and explanations begin on page 683.

Lesson 5: Circles
Key Ideas
Pi, expressed as 3.14, is the ratio of the circumference of a circle to
its diameter.
To find circumference, multiply pi by the diameter (distance across)
the circle.
The radius is the distance from the center to the edge of the circle. To
find area, multiply pi by the square of the radius.

Circumference and Area
A circle is a closed set of points that are all the same distance from a single
point, the center of the circle. The circumference of a circle is its perimeter,
or the distance around the circle. The area of a circle is the space inside the
circle.
To find perimeter and area of a circle, you need to know two other measures
of a circle. The diameter is a line segment with endpoints on the circle that
passes through the center of the circle. The radius is a line segment that
connects the center of the circle to any point on the circle. As you can see
from the diagram, the radius is one-half the diameter.

The formulas for circumference and area use a special quantity called pi (π).
Pi is the ratio of the circumference to the diameter. It is equal to
approximately 3.14. As far as we know, the digits for pi continue infinitely,

so calculations with pi are always approximations. For the Mathematical
Reasoning Test, you will use 3.14 as the value of pi. Below is the formula for
finding the circumference of a circle.

Example 1: A china plate has a gold rim. If the plate’s diameter is
10.5 inches, what is the distance around the rim to the
nearest tenth of an inch?

Use the formula:

Use this formula to find the area of a circle:

, or

.
Example 2: The circular surface of a satellite component must be covered
with heat-resistant tiles. If the radius of the component is 4 meters,
what is the area in square meters?

Use the formula:

In some situations, you may need to solve for either the diameter or radius.
Remember, the diameter is twice the radius
, and the radius is onehalf the diameter:
.
Example 3: What is the circumference of circle B to the nearest tenth of a
centimeter?

1. The radius of the circle is 5 cm. Therefore, the diameter is

, or

10 cm.
2. Use the formula:

Practice 5
A. Find the circumference and area of each circle. Round answers to the
nearest tenth.

1.

2.

3.

B. Choose the one best answer to each question.
Questions 4 and 5 refer to the following drawing.

4. If workers lay a tile border around the edge of the fountain shown in
the diagram, how many feet long will the border be to the nearest foot?
A. 19
B. 36
C. 38
D. 57
5. Which of the following expressions could be used to find the area of
the bottom surface of the fountain?

A.
B.
C.
D.
6. The radius of a circle is 6.5 cm. What is the diameter of the circle in
centimeters?
A. 3.25
B. 13.0
C. 33.16625
D. 132.665
7. On the target below, the 5- and 10-point bands are each 2 inches wide,
and the 25-point inner circle has a diameter of 2 inches. (Note: figure
not drawn to scale.)

To the nearest inch, what is the outer circumference of the 10-point
band?
A. 6
B. 13
C. 19
D. 113
Answers and explanations begin on page 683.

Lesson 6: Volume
Key Ideas
Volume is measured in cubic units that may be written using an
exponent: 6 cubic inches or
.
Find volume by multiplying the area of one base by the height of the
object.
You can also use formulas to find volume.

Rectangular Solids, Cubes, Cylinders, and Spheres
Volume, also called capacity, is the measure of space inside a three-dimensional object. You measure volume in cubic units. In other words, if the
sides of an object are measured in inches, the volume is the number of cubes
(one inch per side) you would need to fill the object.
Many common three-dimensional objects have at least two identical and
parallel faces. Think of a cereal box or a soup can. Both objects have
identical faces at the top and bottom of the container. Either of these faces
can be called the base of the object. To find the volume of any container with
identical bases, multiply the area of one base by the height of the object:
.
Another way to find the volume of an object is to use the formula that applies
specifically to that object.

In the examples below, formulas are used to find the answers, but the
problems can also be solved by simply multiplying the area of the base by the
height.
A rectangular prism has two identical rectangular bases. The remaining
sides of the figure are also rectangles.

GED® TEST TIP
Learn which area formula goes with which shape. Once you
know the area formulas, you can change many of them to
volume by putting an h at the end. Compare:
Area of circle: πr2
Volume of cylinder: πr2h
Example 1: A cardboard box has the dimensions shown in the diagram. What
is the volume of the box in cubic feet?

Use the formula:
A cube is a rectangular prism with six identical faces. In a cube, each edge
(where the sides meet) is the same length.
Example 2: A wood block measures 2 inches per edge. What is the volume of
the block?

Use the formula:
A cylinder has two circular bases. The bases are connected by a curved
surface. Cans, barrels, and tanks are often in the shape of cylinders.
Example 3: A storage tank has a radius of 1.5 meters and a height of 3
meters. What is the volume of the tank to the nearest cubic meter?

Use the formula:

Practice 6.1
A. Find the volume of each object to the nearest whole unit.

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

B. Choose the one best answer to each question.
Question 7 refers to the following drawing.

7. A rectangular box with a volume of 80 cubic feet has the length and
width shown in the drawing. What is the height, in feet, of the box?
A. 5
B. 10
C. 16
D. 20
8. A wooden crate measures 5 feet along each edge. What is the crate’s
volume in cubic feet?
A. 15
B. 25
C. 125

D. 150
Question 9 refers to the following drawing.
9. Linda adds a water stabilizer to her children’s swimming pool once a
week. The instructions tell her to add one scoop of the product for every 20 cubic feet of water. About how many scoops should she add
per week?

A. 3
B. 6
C. 17
D. 36
Answers and explanations begin on page 683.

Volume of Pyramids and Cones
A pyramid is a three-dimensional object with four triangle faces that connect
to the same vertex. The base of a pyramid can be any closed figure, but the
pyramids that you will see on the GED® Mathematical Reasoning Test will
all have square bases.
The rectangular prism and the pyramid shown here both have identical square
bases and the same height. Compare the two figures. As you can see, the
pyramid holds much less than the rectangular prism. In fact, it holds only
one-third of the rectangular prism’s volume.

The formula for finding the volume of a pyramid is as written below. Notice
that B equals the area of the square base. The height of a pyramid is the
perpendicular distance from the base to the vertex at the top.
square pyramid
Example 1: Find the volume of the pyramid shown below.

The length of a base edge is 5 cm. The height of the pyramid is 6 cm. Ignore
the diagonal edges.

Apply the formula:

A cone is similar to a cylinder. Both have a circular base and a curved side.
The curved side of a cone slants inward so that it meets at a point, or vertex.
The volume of a cone is

of the volume of a cylinder with the same size

base and height.
On the GED® Formula Sheet, notice that the formula for the volume of a
cone contains the formula for finding the area of a circle (πr2).
cone
Example 2: Find the volume of the cone shown below.

The radius of the base is 2 inches, and the height is 9 inches.

Apply the formula:

NOTE: In volume formulas for cones and square pyramids, the factor

is

shown first. Don’t begin with this factor. Multiply the other factors first and
then divide by 3, unless one of the numbers is easily divided by 3.

Practice 6.2
A. Find the volume of each object to the nearest unit.

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

B. Choose the one best answer to each question.
7. Advertisers have designed this pyramid-shaped package to hold action
figures.

After testing the design, the manufacturer decides to increase both the
length and width of the base by 4 cm. How many more cubic
centimeters will the new package hold than the package shown above?
A. 480
B. 500
C. 980

D. 2,940
8. The height of a cone is half the diameter of its base. If the cone’s
height is 4 inches, what is the cone’s volume to the nearest cubic inch?
A. 21
B. 48
C. 67
D. 268
9. Which of the following is a true statement about the figures shown
below?

A. The volume of figure a equals the volume of figure B.
B. The volume of figure B is greater than the volume of figure A.
C. Both figures A and B have a volume greater than 20 cubic
centimeters.
D. The volume of figure B is less than the volume of figure A.
10. A cone’s base is a circle with a radius of 8 inches. The cone’s height is
15 inches. What is the cone’s approximate volume in cubic inches?
A. 125
B. 250
C. 500
D. 1,000
Answers and explanations begin on page 683.

Lesson 7: Surface Area
The surface area is the total area of the outside faces of three-dimensional
figures. This is different from the volume, which is the capacity of what a
figure can hold. Surface area is expressed in square units.

Key Ideas
The surface area is the area of the total surface of a three-dimensional
object.
To find the surface area of a cube, you need to multiply the area of
one side by 6.
To find the surface area of a rectangular prism and a pyramid, you
need to use formulas to find several dimensions and combine them.

Surface Area of a Square Prism
The surface area of a square prism (cube) is the sum of the areas of the six
squares that form the prism. The area of one square is s2. Since these sides
are the same, find the area of one side and multiply by 6.
Example 1: Find the surface area of a cube with sides of
3 inches each.

Surface Area of a Rectangular Prism
The surface area of a rectangular prism is the sum of the areas of the six
rectangles that form the prism.
Example 2: Find the surface area of this box.

GED® TEST TIP
Memorize the process for finding the surface area of a cube.
The formulas for surface areas of prisms and pyramids are
listed on the online Formula Sheet on the GED® Mathematical
Reasoning Test.

Surface Area of a Pyramid
The surface area of a pyramid is

the perimeter of the base (p) times the

slant height (s) plus the area of the base (B). The slant height is the length of
a line segment from the apex (top) to the base.

Example 3: What is the approximate surface area of a pyramid with a slant
height of 5 feet, a base with a perimeter of 14 feet, and a base with an
approximate area of 12 square feet?

Practice 7.1
A. Find the surface area of each object in square units. Use the formulas
on page 402.

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

B. Choose the one best answer to each question. Use the formulas on
page 402.
7. All the edges of a metal box are of equal length. If the surface area is

150 square inches, what is the length, in inches, of each edge of the
box?
A. 5
B. 6
C. 25
D. 50
8. Which of the following is a true statement about the figures shown
below? (Measurements indicated are all in the same units. Note that
the figures are not drawn to scale.)

Figure B
Figure A
A. The surface area of Figure A is equal to the surface area of Figure
B.
B. The surface area of Figure A is half of the surface area of Figure
B.
C. The surface area of Figure A is greater than the surface area of
Figure B.
D. The sum of the surface areas of both Figure A and Figure B is
greater than 300.
9. If the dimensions of the box below are doubled, by how many square
centimeters does the surface area increase?

A. 8
B. 54
C. 162
D. 216
Answers and explanations begin on page 684.
Finding the surface areas of cylinders, cones, and spheres involves using
some dimensions of circles.

Key Ideas
The formulas for surface area of cylinders, cones, and spheres all use
dimensions of a circle.
All of the formulas use π and the radius of a circle.

Surface Area of a Cylinder
To find the surface area of a cylinder, multiply the circumference (2πr) by the
height (h) and add the product to the area of the two ends of the cylinder,
each of which is the area of a circle (πr2).
Example 1: Find the surface area of a cylinder
with a radius (r) of 4 inches and a
height (h) of 3 inches.

You may find the on-screen calculator helpful to complete these
calculations effectively.

GED® TEST TIP
The three formulas on this page are available on the online
Formula Sheet on the GED® Mathematical Reasoning Test.

Surface Area of a Cone
The surface area of a cone is found by combining the lateral side surface
(πrs) with the area of its base (πr2).
Example 2: Find the surface area of a cone with a radius of 2 feet and a slant
height of 5 feet.

Surface Area of a Sphere
The surface area of a sphere is four times the area of a circle with the same
radius as the sphere.
Example 3: What is the surface area of this sphere with a radius of 10 feet?

Practice 7.2
A. Find the surface area of each object in square units. Express your
answer in terms of pi (for example, 36π). Use the formulas on page
404.

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

B. Choose the one best answer to each question. Use the formulas on
page 404.
7. If the length of the diameter of a sphere is 8, how many square units is
its surface area?
A. 16π
B. 64π
C. 256π
D. 512π
8. A cone, pictured below, has a slant height of 8 inches and a diameter
of 8 inches. If the cone’s slant height is doubled, and the diameter is
halved, which of the following statements must be true?

A. The new cone will have the same surface area as the original cone.
B. The new cone will have a surface area exactly half of the surface
area of the original cone.
C. The new cone will have a surface area exactly double that of the
surface area of the new cone.
D. The new cone will have a surface area less than the surface area of
the original cone.
9. In the cylinder below, the diameter of the circular base is equal to the
height of the cylinder. What is the surface area of the cylinder, to the
nearest square inch?

A. 57
B. 113
C. 170
D. 339
Answers and explanations begin on page 684.

Lesson 8: Combined Figures
Key Ideas
Combined figures are made from two or more simple figures.
To find the perimeter of a combined figure, add the lengths of all the
sides.
To find area or volume of a combined figure, break the figure into
parts and find the area or volume of each part; then combine the
results.

Breaking Combined Figures into Parts
A combined figure puts together geometric figures to form a new shape. To
find the perimeter of a combined figure, simply add the lengths of the sides.
You may need to solve for one or more missing lengths.
Example 1: A family room has the dimensions shown in the diagram. All
measures are in feet. What is the perimeter of the room?

1. Find the missing measures. Measurement x equals the combined
lengths of the two opposite walls: x = 8 + 4 = 12 ft. You also know that
18 − 10 = y, so y = 8 ft.
2. Add all distances to find the perimeter:

.
To find the area or volume of a combined figure, break the figure into parts.
Then apply the correct formula to each part.
Example 2: What is the area of the figure in square centimeters?

1. Divide the figure into two shapes and find any missing measurements.
Here the figure is divided into a trapezoid and a rectangle.
2. Calculate the area of each shape.
Rectangle:

Trapezoid:
3. Combine:

.

GED® TEST TIP

There is usually more than one way to break down a combined
figure. Solve the problem the way that seems easiest to you. The
answer will be the same.
Example 3: Find the volume of the container shown below.
Break the figure into a cylinder and a cone and find the volume of each.

1. Cylinder:
2. Cone:
3. Combine: 6.28 + 1.57 = 7.85 m3 or 7.85 cu m.

Practice 8
A. Find the perimeter and area of each figure.

1.

2.

(Hint: Think of the figure as a rectangle and a half circle.)

3.

B. Find the volume of each figure to the nearest cubic unit.

4.

5.

6.

C. Choose the one best answer to each question.
7. A slab of concrete will have four concrete blocks in each corner as
shown in the drawing below.

If each corner block has the same dimensions, what is the volume of
the structure in cubic feet?
A. 72
B. 168
C. 288
D. 360
8. A candy package is in the shape of a cylinder with a cone on each
end.

If the radius of the cylinder is 2 inches and the cones are identical,
what is the capacity of the container to the nearest cubic inch?
A. 33
B. 100
C. 134
D. 201
Answers and explanations begin on page 684.

Lesson 9: Geometry Calculator Skills
Key Ideas
When a problem involves many calculations, use the order of
operations to decide which operation to do first.
Check your work by estimating an answer or by quickly repeating the
keystrokes to see if the result is the same.

When solving problems with formulas, you can generally save time by
performing some or all of the operations on a calculator. Remember the order
of operations when solving formulas and always check your work, either by
reentering the key sequence or by estimating an answer and comparing your
answer to the estimate.
Example 1: A pyramid has a height of 81 feet. The base is in the shape of a
square with each side measuring 40 feet. What is the volume in cubic
feet of the pyramid?

Use the formula for the volume of a pyramid:

. Begin by calculating the

area of the base: 40 × 40, or 402. Multiply that by the height, 81. In the last
step, dividing by 3 is the same as multiplying by

Evaluate the exponent.

.

40

Multiply by 81.

81

Divide by 3.
The right side of the display shows the correct answer, 43,200. 43200
To enter this formula using a fraction using one series of keystrokes on the
TI-30XS MultiViewTM calculator, enter the following:
.
The right side of the display shows 43200.
The volume of the pyramid is 43,200 square feet.

GED® TEST TIP
Watch the calculator display while you are entering all of these
keystrokes. If you make a mistake, use the delete key to remove
that mistake and then replace it with the correct number or
function. Practice that with these examples.

You may need your calculator to find the exact answer to problems that
involve the Pythagorean relationship. These problems can also be done in one
series of keystrokes.
Example 2: A right triangle has legs 10 inches and 24 inches in length. What
is the length of the hypotenuse?
Use the formula
. You will need to add the squares of the
legs and then find the square root of the total.
Press:

. The display will read 676. Then

press

. The right side of the display shows 26.

The hypotenuse is 26 inches in length.
If you need to include the quantity pi (π) in a calculation, the TI-30XS
MultiViewTM calculator includes a pi key, located three keys below the 2nd
key on the left-hand side of the keypad.
Example 3: What is the area of a circle with radius 2.4 cm? Round your
answer to the nearest tenth.
Use the formula

. Press

and then press

. The right side of the display reads 18.09557368.
Round that to find the answer: 18.1 cm2.

Practice 9
A. Use your calculator to evaluate each formula.
1. Find the perimeter of a rectangle with a length of 16 inches and a
width of 5 inches.

2. Find the area of a triangle with a base of 26 centimeters and a
height of 15 centimeters.
3. What is the volume of a cube if the edge measures 3.5 feet? Round
to the nearest cubic foot.
4. What is the measure of the hypotenuse of a right triangle when the
legs measure 13 cm and 9 cm? Round your answer to the nearest
tenth.
Pythagorean relationship:
5. Find the circumference of a circle with a diameter of 12 inches.
Round to the nearest tenth.
6. Find the volume of a cone with a radius of 12 cm and a height of 20
cm. Round to the nearest cm3.

B. Choose the one best answer to each question. You MAY use your
calculator.
Question 7 refers to the following drawing.

7. For a woodworking project, Paul cuts the shape shown above from
plywood. What is the area in square inches of the piece? (Hint: Think
of the shape as a triangle removed from a rectangle.)
A. 400

B. 480
C. 520
D. 640
8. To the nearest cubic meter, what is the volume of a cylinder with a
radius of 1.5 meters and a height of 5 meters?
A. 25
B. 35
C. 45
D. 141
Questions 9 and 10 refer to the drawing.

All measurements are in centimeters.
9. How many cubic centimeters greater is the volume of Box A than the
volume of Box B?
A. 64
B. 1,448
C. 4,928
D. 5,056
10. An advertiser plans to print advertisements on one side panel of each
of the boxes (the shaded faces in the drawing). What is the total area,
in square centimeters, that the advertiser will cover?
A. 224
B. 384
C. 608
D. 1,448

Answers and explanations begin on page 684.

Geometry Practice Questions
1. What is the surface area, in square centimeters, of a cube with each
edge length of 5 cm?
A. 15
B. 25
C. 125
D. 150
2. What is the surface area, in square centimeters, of a cylinder with a
height of 10 cm and a radius of 6 cm?
A. 136π
B. 160π
C. 192π
D. 256π
3. What is the surface area, in square centimeters, of a cylinder that
measures 8 cm tall with a diameter of 6 cm on its base?
A. 48π
B. 57π
C. 66π
D. 132 π
4. A pyramid has a square base. If each edge of the pyramid is 4, what is
the total surface area of the entire pyramid?
A.
B.
C.
D.

Question 5 refers to the following figure.

5. A toy factory paints all of its rubber balls with 2 coats of latex for
durability. How many square centimeters of latex are needed to cover a
rubber ball with a circumference of
?
A.
B.
C.
D.
6. The floor of a walk-in closet measures 7 feet by 4 feet. If the ceiling
height is 8 feet, what is the volume in cubic feet of the closet?
A. 28
B. 56
C. 112
D. 224
Question 7 refers to the following figure.

7. An ice cream cone has a spherical scoop of ice cream placed inside.
Exactly one-half of the ice cream is visible above the rim of the cone.
What is the surface area of the entire ice cream treat, in units squared?
A.
B.
C.
D.
8. The radius of Sphere A is 2, and the radius of Sphere B is 1. What is the
ratio of the volume of Sphere A to that of Sphere B? (Hint: Use the
formula for the volume of a sphere on page 398.)
A. 1:2
B. 4:1
C. 8:1
D. 8:3
9. A parallelogram has a base of 6 centimeters and a height of 10
centimeters. This parallelogram has the same area as a triangle with a
height of 5 centimeters. What is the measure, in centimeters, of the base
of the triangle?
Write your answer in the box.

Question 10 refers to the following figure.

10. Three identical rectangular boxes are stacked one on top of another. The
total height of all three boxes is the same as the width of one box. The
length of the boxes is 18 in., and the width is half the length. What is the
combined volume, in cubic inches, of all three boxes?
A. 1458
B. 1800
C. 2124
D. 3136
11. Using a compass, Max hikes 300 yards due north of his campsite. From
that point, he hikes 400 yards due east. If he were to hike directly to his
campsite from this point, how many yards would he have to hike?
A. 400
B. 500
C. 600
D. 700
12. The rectangular base of a container is 9 inches long and 7 inches wide. By
how many cubic inches will the volume of the container increase if you
increase the length of the base by 2 inches?

A. 84
B. 126
C. 168
D. 216
13. In a right triangle, the hypotenuse measures 15 inches. If one leg of the
triangle measures 6 inches, which of the following equations could be
used to find the length of the other leg (x) in inches?
A.
B.
C.
D.
14. The length of a rectangle is three times its width. If the perimeter of the
rectangle is 96 inches, what is its length in inches?
A. 12
B. 24
C. 36
D. 48
Question 15 refers to the following figure.

15. Sarah is making party hats for a birthday party. Each hat is in the shape of
a cone and will have a circumference of
and a slant height of 7
cm. She will be making 20 hats. What is the total surface area, in square
centimeters, of all 20 hats combined?
A. 54π
B. 96π
C. 192π
D. 1,920 π
Question 16 refers to the following figure.

16. Use your calculator to make the following calculation. In the figure
above, a square contains a circle such that each of the sides of the square
is touching a point on the circle. What is the approximate area, in square
inches, of the shaded portion?
A. 3.43

B. 12.57
C. 16.00
D. 28.57
Questions 17 and 18 refer to the following.
A classroom is 40 feet long and 25 feet wide. The ceiling height is 12 feet.
The school district plans to repaint the room and put in air-conditioning. The
ceiling tile will not be painted.
17. What is the approximate total square footage of the four walls of the
room? Ignore space taken up by windows and doors.
A. 1200
B. 1560
C. 1920
D. 4000
18. To choose an air-conditioning system, the school district must know the
volume of the room. What is the volume in cubic feet?
A. 1000
B. 3120
C. 12000
D. 15625
Question 19 refers to the following figures.

19. Laura is painting model pyramids for an art project. She needs one tube
of paint for every 30 square inches of surface area. If Laura paints each
pyramid and its base, approximately how many tubes of paint should she
buy?
A. 4
B. 16
C. 48
D. 109
Answers and explanations begin on page 684.

GED® Test Mathematics Formula Sheet

UNIT 3

Social Studies
About the Test
The GED® Social Studies Test evaluates your ability to understand, interpret,
and apply information. You will have 70 minutes to answer 35 questions that
are based on reading passages and interpreting graphics such as charts,
graphs, diagrams, editorial cartoons, photographs, and maps.
You will need a minimum score of 145 to pass the Social Studies Test, which
is one of the four tests you will need to pass in order to earn a high school
equivalency diploma.

Content Areas
Civics and Government (50%) topics include modern and historic
governments, constitutional government, levels and branches of the U.S.
government, the electoral system, and the role of the citizen.
U.S. History (20%) topics stretch from colonialism and the American
Revolution through the Civil War and Reconstruction into the modern era of
industrialization, immigration, two world wars, the Cold War, and the
movements for equal rights.

Economics (15%) topics include basic economics concepts and systems, the
government and the economy, and labor and consumer economics issues.
Geography and the World (15%) topics cover major stages in world history
as well as the relationship among resources, the environment, and societies.

Social Studies Practices
In addition to testing your understanding of social studies passages and
graphics, questions are based on your understanding of major skills, called
Social Studies Practices, and these skills introduce this unit on pages 420–
436. After you study these practices, you will reinforce them as you work
through the unit. They include the following:
Determine Central Ideas, Inferences, Hypotheses, and Conclusions.
Analyze Words, Events, and Ideas in Social Studies Contexts.
Analyze Author’s Purpose and Point of View.
Evaluate Author’s Reasoning and Evidence.
Analyze and Integrate Relationships Within and Between Social
Studies Materials.
Interpret Data and Statistics in Graphs and Charts.
Find the Center in a Statistical Data Set, Including Average, Median,
and Mode.

Computer-Based Social Studies Test Question
Formats
You will work with five question formats on the Social Studies Test. Many of
the questions will be in the familiar multiple-choice format, but you will need
to be acquainted with the other formats as well.
Multiple-choice questions have four options (A through D). You will click
on the best answer.

Which statement correctly describes a significant way that aristocracy
differs from democracy as a political system?
A. In an aristocracy, power is always directly exercised by
the people.
B. In an aristocracy, power is concentrated in the hands of a
small group.
C. In an aristocracy, all adults are equal before the law.
D. In a democracy, all laws are seen as divinely ordained.

GED® TEST TIP
Fill-in-the-blank questions can have only one correct answer.
Find a specific number, word, or phrase in the passage or
graphic to type in the box or complete a computation if
required by the question.
Fill-in-the-blank questions will require you to type a word, phrase, or
number in a box that appears on the screen.

Type the appropriate state name in the box.
The number of representatives in Congress from the state of
is
twice the number of representatives in Congress from the state of
Pennsylvania.

Drop-down questions give you the opportunity to click on the correct response to complete a statement.

An industrial economy exists within a web of complex relationships.
Goods must first be
before they can be sold, but no goods
can be sold without
to buy them. The largest group of
buyers are ordinary citizens, who cannot buy without
, the
most common source of which is
, frequently earned
through employment in the production of goods.

Hot-spot items consist of a graphic image or images. You will need to click
on one or more “points” or graphics on the screen.

Drag-and-drop items require you to click on a small image, words, or
numerical expression and to drag and drop it in a specified location on the
computer screen.

Math Problems on the Social Studies Test
Many social studies investigations use mathematics. For that reason, there
will be math questions on the GED® Social Studies Test. You will focus on
math skills in this unit with the Social Studies Practices lesson on pages 432–
433 and with problems that have this symbol:
.

Example
What is the average median income for the five states listed in the chart,
rounded to the nearest dollar? You MAY use your calculator.
Median Household Income, 2011
Hawaii

$59,047

Kentucky

$39,856

Maryland

$68,876

New Mexico

$41,982

New York

$50,636

A. $41,952
B. $50,338

C. $52,079
D. $52,200

Solution
Step 1. Write the equation: Average = sum of amounts ÷ number of
amounts.
Step 2. Add 59,047 + 39,856 + 68,876 + 41,982 + 50,636 to get the
sum of the amounts (260,397).
Step 3. Divide by the number of amounts (5) to get the average:
260,397 ÷ 5 = 52,079.40; round to the nearest dollar: C. $52,079.
Although you do not have to use a calculator, you may use either a handheld
or an on-screen version of the TI-30XS MultiView™ calculator on the Social
Studies Test. Some problems will say: You MAY use your calculator. When
you see that language, the calculator icon appears at the top of the screen. If
you cannot remember how to use the calculator, you can open the online
Calculator Reference Sheet. Both links are shown below.

GED® TEST TIP
You are encouraged to purchase a handheld version of the
Texas Instruments TI-30XS MultiView™ calculator for
practice as you work through this book. You can buy one at
office or school supply stores or from online vendors.

You can click the links to open, move, and close both the online Texas
Instruments TI-30XS MultiViewTM calculator and the Calculator Reference
Sheet. You will want to move them on the computer screen so that they don’t

block the problem. Also remember that you will have an off-line wipe-off
board that you can use as scratch paper.

CHAPTER 1

Social Studies Practices
Lesson 1: Determine Central Idea and
Draw Conclusions
The central idea of a passage or graphic is its topic or main point. This is
supported by details or examples.

Key Ideas
Social Studies Test presentations consist of text, graphics, or a
combination of the two.
Comprehending social studies material requires understanding the
central idea or point and its supporting details.
Social Studies Test questions also require you to make inferences in
order to draw conclusions.

At the outset of the Revolutionary War, the American colonies had a
small navy of only 31 ships. To contest the far superior number of
vessels in the British fleet, the colonies employed privateers,

independent ships authorized to harass and capture enemy merchant
and cargo ships. Armed with more than 14,000 guns, American
privateers captured well over 2,000 enemy ships. These figures
demonstrate how difficult it would have been, without the aid of
privateers, for the colonies to win their independence against a larger,
better equipped British Navy.
▶ What is the topic of this passage?
(1) the importance of colonial privateers to winning the Revolutionary War
(2) the fact that American privateers captured well over 2,000 enemy ships
Choice (1) is correct. The main point of the passage is that privateers were
crucial to the colonies’ success in their war for independence. The number of
ships captured by privateers, referred to in choice (2), is used to support that
point.
One skill needed to understand social studies information is the ability to
draw conclusions from what you read or see. This skill requires you to go
beyond what is directly stated and make an inference about what is meant or
implied.

GED® TEST TIP
To answer GED® Test questions based on a passage or
graphic, ask yourself, “What is the main point? What evidence
or details are used to support it? What conclusion can I
draw?”
▶ Which of the following conclusions can be drawn based on this graph?

(1) The productivity of a bakery is based on a number of factors.
(2) The productivity of the bakery rises when more bakers are added.
You were correct if you selected choice (2). As you look at the graph, the line
—the number of cakes baked—rises steeply when more bakers are added.
This associates the productivity of the bakery with the number of bakers.
Choice (1) may well be true, but it is not a conclusion based on this graph.

Practice 1
Questions 1 through 3 are based on the following passage.
Theater was one of the most popular forms of art in ancient Greece, and one
form of drama—tragedy—was central to Greek culture. Tragedies told
familiar stories from Greek myths and epics, but actors portrayed the main
roles, and a chorus narrated the background of the story and commented upon
the action. These serious dramas centered on a main character who displayed
exceptional attributes but also had a tragic flaw that caused his downfall. This
flaw was often hubris, which is excessive pride or overconfidence.
1. Which of the following is the topic of the paragraph?
A. the superiority of Greek theater
B. the standard forms of Greek drama

C. the characteristics of Greek tragedy
D. the most popular Greek tragedies
2. Which of these details supports the central idea?
A. Theater was one of the most popular Greek art forms.
B. Tragedies were more important than comedies in ancient Greece.
C. Greeks thought flaws other than hubris were not tragic.
D. The main character in Greek drama has a tragic flaw that causes his
downfall.
3. Which of these conclusions is supported by the paragraph?
A. Ancient Greeks did not expect to see an original story each time they
attended the theater.
B. Playwrights in ancient Greece also wrote myths and epics.
C. Tragedies in ancient Greece were judged on the basis of how serious
their stories were.
D. Only highly cultured people attended tragedies in ancient Greece.
Questions 4 and 5 are based on this graphic.

4. The graph answers which of the following questions?
A. What is the dollar value of the income for senior citizens?

B. How much do senior citizens have in savings accounts?
C. How many senior citizens are dependent upon veterans’ benefits for
their retirement income?
D. Where do the incomes of senior citizens come from?
5. Which of the following conclusions can be drawn from this graph?
A. More senior citizens need to continue to work in order to make ends
meet now than in the past.
B. Social Security benefits are the most widespread means of support for
most senior citizens.
C. Senior citizens who receive income from veterans’ benefits also
receive benefits from public assistance.
D. Senior citizens who do not receive Social Security benefits get income
from one or more other sources.
Answers and explanations start on page 686.

Lesson 2: Interpret Words and Ideas
When you interpret social studies materials, you need to understand key
terms in context. For instance, on page 454, the word articles is presented.
You already know an everyday use of the word, such as “articles of
clothing,” but in the context on page 454, an article refers to a section of the
U.S. Constitution.

Key Ideas
Reading social studies materials requires understanding key terms in
their context.
Social studies material is often organized as a sequence of events or
as steps in a process.
Analyzing social studies materials often involves relating causes to
effects.

Some social studies material is organized in chronological or time order.
Look at the timeline below and answer a question about the sequence of
events.

▶ Which of the following events preceded the invention of the carbon arc
lightbulb?
(1) invention of the telephone
(2) invention of the carbon filament lightbulb
Timelines are read left to right from oldest to most recent, so choice (1) is
correct. Choice (2) refers to the carbon filament lightbulb, invented in 1879,
two years after the carbon arc lightbulb.
Another way that social studies material is organized is by cause and effect,
which is another way of asking “What resulted from this action?” or “What
made this event happen?” Read the following paragraph to practice this skill.

GED® TEST TIP
To learn key social studies terms, pay close attention to the
meaning of the words in bold type in the history, government,
economics, and geography sections of this unit.
The prices of goods and services are determined by the relationship between
supply and demand. When supply exceeds demand, sellers must lower prices
to stimulate sales; on the other hand, when demand exceeds supply,
consumers bid up prices as they compete to purchase items or services that

they desire.
▶ Based on the theory of supply and demand, under which of the following
scenarios would prices be most likely to rise?
(1) The demand for a product exceeds that product’s supply.
(2) Producers and sellers advertise a product in order to stimulate demand
for that product.
Choice (1) is correct. According to the law of supply and demand, prices rise
when demand outpaces supply. Choice (2) describes a situation in which
producers and sellers advertise to stimulate demand for their product, but
without knowing whether the supply is limited, we cannot conclude that this
would cause the price to increase.

Practice 2
Questions 1 through 3 are based on this passage.
From 1820 to 1870, more than 7.5 million immigrants arrived on U.S. shores.
That was more people than the entire U.S. population in 1810. Almost all of
these immigrants came from Northern Europe, and a majority were Catholic.
Historians have often focused on what “pushed” these emigrants out of
Europe. During the 1840s, for example, Germany experienced a series of
crop failures that, combined with social upheaval triggered by rapid
industrialization in urban areas, produced riots, civil unrest, and open
rebellion. During the same years, Ireland saw the infamous “potato famine”
strike poor and working-class Irish families, killing an estimated 700,000
people.
While those crises spurred Europeans to emigrate, a variety of factors created
a simultaneous “pull” to immigrate to the United States. Letters home from
friends and family members who had immigrated earlier often described the
United States as a “land of plenty” and related stories of successful
employment and plentiful land. Steamship companies offering passage across
the Atlantic advertised with posters that showed majestic scenes of American
abundance.

1. According to the passage, which of the following was a cause of Northern
European immigration to the United States in the 1840s and 1850s?
A. Americans’ desire to double the population of the United States
B. efforts by Northern European governments to reduce the number of
people living in poverty
C. political and social instability in some Northern European countries
D. efforts to spread Catholicism to the United States
2. Based on the passage, which one of the following was most likely to have
been featured on a steamship company poster?
A. a folk-art painting depicting the life of the rural poor in the United
States
B. a portrait of an American politician from the 1840s
C. a poster advertising an American product
D. a painting of pioneers settling and farming productive prairie land
3. Which of the following results of Northern European immigration to the
United States in the mid-1800s can be inferred from the passage?
A. a spread of poverty in the United States
B. a decline in political upheaval in Northern Europe
C. a growth in the population of the United States
D. a number of Americans converting to the Catholic faith
Questions 4 and 5 are based on this timeline.

4. Given the information in the timeline, which of the following would be a
flawed inference?
A. Mechanized farming contributed to dust storms.
B. Internal migration led to overgrazing.
C. Severe drought contributed to “black blizzards.”
D. Some farmers left the Dust Bowl before the worst dust storm hit the
region.
5. Which of the following could have been a cause of the Great Dust Bowl?
A. “black blizzards”
B. internal migration
C. depleted topsoil
D. failed farms
Answers and explanations start on page 686.

Lesson 3: Analyze Author’s Purpose and
Point of View
Key Ideas
Social studies material may be written to inform or to persuade.
Thoughtful readers need to take an author’s purpose and point of
view into account.
Some authors may express a bias or point of view by the selection of
supporting details or use of loaded words.

Any author of social studies material has a viewpoint and a purpose. Social
studies material can have many purposes, such as to inform or educate (for
example, a textbook or magazine article). Other materials, such as newspaper
editorials and online blogs, are used to convince people of a point of view.

An author’s point of view is his or her way of looking at the world. Some
social scientists follow a method of examining the facts and coming to a
conclusion. In other cases, an author may start with a point of view and
assemble facts or evidence to support it.
When you read social studies materials, determine whether an author has a
bias, a tendency to see one point of view. A bias is not a bad thing in and of
itself (after all, we all have biases), but you should take the author’s bias into
account. An extreme form of bias is propaganda, in which an author tries to
convince people to act and think as the author wants. Authors of propaganda
selectively include certain facts and ignore others, or they use loaded words
to trigger emotional responses. Use the following example to practice finding
the author’s point of view.

GED® TEST TIP
You may be provided with a newspaper editorial, an online
blog commentary, or a speech. Ask yourself, “What is the
author’s viewpoint? How are facts and evidence organized to
be convincing? How are words chosen to have an impact?”
Until the 1980s, most anthropologists mistakenly estimated the native
population in North America at the time of Columbus’s expedition in
1492 to be somewhere between 2 million and 7 million people. They
based these estimates on the number of Native Americans alive at the
time of their first contact with European explorers and settlers.
However, the estimates ignored the impact of infectious diseases,
such as smallpox, which traveled much faster than humans did and
would have decimated the native population before Europeans made
contact with native people.
▶ What is the author’s point of view about the population of North America in
1492?

(1) that it was not exactly 2 million people or 7 million people but was
somewhere in between those two numbers
(2) that it was probably much larger than 7 million people
Choice (2) is correct. The author points out a reason to think that
anthropologists prior to the 1980s undercounted the native population.
Answer (1) gives the estimate of most anthropologists prior to the 1980s.
▶ Which of the following words is a clue to the author’s viewpoint?
(1) ignored
(2) estimated
The correct choice is (1). The author believes that the anthropologists’
estimates were flawed because they ignored relevant information about the
impact of diseases on the native population. Choice (2) misses the author’s
point; he doesn’t fault them for estimating, but rather for ignoring evidence
when they made their estimates.

Practice 3
Questions 1 through 3 are based on the paragraph and poster below.
During World War I, the U.S. National War Garden Commission began a
campaign to encourage private citizens to grow their own food as a means of
supporting the war effort. This practice became very popular. With increased
private food production, the government could reserve much of the cheaper,
mass-produced food for the troops. The money saved in feeding soldiers
freed up resources for other military needs. In addition, planting war gardens,
also known as victory gardens, gave American citizens a sense of
empowerment.

1. Which of the following best describes the poster’s use of the word victory?
A. ambiguous
B. informative
C. propagandistic
D. impersonal
2. What is meant by the poster’s caption “Every Garden a Munition Plant”?
A. War gardens require a great deal of time to cultivate.
B. Citizens who plant war gardens encourage a sense of community in
their hometowns.
C. Citizens who plant war gardens help supply the war effort with
essential resources.
D. War gardens provide an excellent opportunity to learn about
gardening, canning, and food drying.

3. The author’s primary purpose in writing the paragraph accompanying the
poster is most likely to
A. describe war gardens and explain their popularity in the United States
B. encourage patriotism and continued support for a strong United States
military
C. distinguish the efforts of American citizens during World War I from
those of citizens in other countries
D. rebut the accusations of those who claimed that civilians did not do
enough to support the U.S. war effort in World War I
Question 4 is based on the following dialogue.
Congresswoman Burns: The new organic food safety regulations are likely to
increase the average cost of some food staples. The costs are justified,
however, by the peace of mind that comes from knowing your food is safe
and healthy.
Concerned Citizen: Rising prices are a cancer eating away at our families.
High costs will drive people away from healthy foods and wind up harming
our children’s diets. Instead of buying wholesome, natural products, parents
will feed their kids fast food.
4. Which of the following constitute “loaded” words the Concerned Citizen
uses to support her point?
A. high costs
B. fast food
C. a cancer
D. our children’s diets
Answers and explanations start on page 686.

Lesson 4: Evaluate Author’s Reasoning and
Evidence

Key Ideas
An author’s point of view may be supported by facts, opinions, and
reasoned judgment.
While reading, analyze whether information is a fact, an opinion, or a
conclusion based on reasoning or evidence.
A careful reader evaluates whether an author supports his or her
claims with evidence.

Social studies authors in print and online publications use a variety of
strategies to support their viewpoints. They may use the following:
Facts—information that can be proven to be true
Opinions—beliefs about a concept or situation
Judgments—conclusions that are supported by reasons and evidence
On the GED® Social Studies Test, you need to read carefully to distinguish
among these three concepts.
▶ Indicate whether each of the following statements is a fact (F), an opinion
(O), or a judgment ( J).
(1) ___ Because it raises the amount employers will pay in payroll taxes,
the new tax bill may contribute to higher unemployment.
(2) ___ Last year, manufacturing output in our state rose by 4.6 percent
over the previous year.
(3) ___ We should limit the role played by the federal government in
formulating energy policy for our region of the country.
Statement (1) is a judgment; the author’s conclusion (that the bill may
increase unemployment) is based on evidence (that the bill raises payroll
taxes). Statement (2) is a fact; the truth or falsity of the statement can be
checked against empirical data. Statement (3) is an opinion; the author makes
a recommendation (limit the role of the federal government) but offers no
evidence or reasoning to support it.

GED® TEST TIP
When you read an author’s viewpoint, ask yourself, “What is
the claim being made? Is evidence provided to support this
claim? Is the evidence relevant to the claim and sufficient and
credible enough to support it?”
To be credible, a author needs to support his or her claims with evidence. Part
of your job on the Social Studies Test is to answer questions about whether or
not an author’s claims are supported.
Delaware was the first state to ratify the U.S. Constitution. Because of its
history of favorable corporate tax policies, Delaware is today home to 63
percent of Fortune 500 corporations. There is no doubt then that Delaware’s
freedom-of-information act, requiring the state government to respond within
15 days of a request, should serve as a model for similar acts in other U.S.
states.
▶ Does the author support the claim of the passage?
(1) Yes, because he believes and asserts that there is no doubt about the
truth of the claim.
(2) No, because he asserts the truth of the claim without offering evidence
relevant to the claim.
Choice (2) is correct. The author’s claim is that Delaware’s freedom-ofinformation act should serve as a model for similar acts in other states, but
the other statements in the passage are irrelevant to that claim. Choice (1) is
incorrect because stating a claim firmly (“no doubt”) does not provide
support for the claim.

Practice 4
1. Consultant: A reliable energy supply is vital to developing a stable

economy in Cambodia, a country still recovering from decades of civil
war and genocide in the late 1970s in which millions of Cambodians were
killed. Damming the Mekong River could solve Cambodia’s energy
supply problems. However, since the Mekong flows through China,
Myanmar, Laos, and Thailand before it reaches Cambodia, regional
cooperation will be necessary.
Which of the following is an opinion, and not a fact, presented by the
consultant?
A. Damming the Mekong could solve Cambodia’s energy problems.
B. The Mekong River flows through several countries before reaching
Cambodia.
C. Cambodia experienced civil war.
D. Millions of Cambodians were killed in the late 1970s.
Question 2 is based on this cartoon referencing the labor movement of
the early 20th century.

2. Which of the following represents the viewpoint of the cartoonist?

A. Strikes can achieve better working conditions.
B. Strikes have a detrimental impact on workers.
C. Farmworkers are more likely to engage in strikes than are factory
workers.
D. Strikes should hamper production.
3. Historian: Ancient Greece was the greatest of the early civilizations. While
the Babylonians may have had arithmetic and ancient Egypt built the
pyramids, ancient Greece gave us our first taste of democracy.
Which of the following is a fact that the historian uses to support her
opinion?
A. Ancient Greece was the greatest early civilization.
B. Babylonians made use of arithmetic.
C. The pyramids were built in ancient Egypt.
D. Ancient Greece pioneered democracy.
Question 4 is based on the following chart.
The Articles of Confederation were the predecessor to the United States
Constitution.
The Articles of
Confederation

The Constitution

Federal
Court
System

No system of federal courts

Court system exists to deal
with issues between citizens,
states

Regulating
Trade

No provision to regulate
interstate trade

Congress has the right to
regulate trade between states

Executive
Power

No executive with power;
president merely presided
over Congress

Executive branch is headed
by president who chooses
Cabinet and has checks on
power of judiciary and
legislature

Raising an
Army

Congress could not draft
Congress can raise an army
troops; depended on states to to deal with military
contribute forces
situations

Sovereignty

Sovereignty resides in states

The Constitution is the
supreme law of the land

Taxes

Congress could ask states to
pay taxes

Congress has the right to
levy taxes on individuals

4. Which of the following is a conclusion supported by the table above,
rather than a detail stated in the table?
A. The Constitution allows Congress to enforce collection of taxes,
whereas the Articles of Confederation did not.
B. The Constitution grants more power to the federal government than did
the Articles of Confederation.
C. There were no national armed forces before the Constitution was
drafted.
D. Trade was not nationally regulated by the Articles of Confederation.
Answers and explanations start on page 686.

Lesson 5: Analyze Relationships Between
Materials
Key Ideas
Social studies materials may use graphics to illustrate key concepts.
Circle, bar, and line graphs visually portray social studies
information.
Maps are drawings that show places and regions with keys,
compasses, and scales.

Content Presented in Graphic Format
Social studies content is often presented in graphic form. Two of the most
useful displays are graphs and maps.
Circle graphs are used to show how a whole is divided into parts; they show
fractions or percents.

Line graphs and bar graphs organize material by using labels on the bottom
axis and values on the side.

GED® TEST TIP
When you interpret a social studies graphic, carefully read the
title and all labels and keys to make sure that you correctly
understand the main idea and the type of information being

displayed.
Maps may use a legend (also called the key) to explain symbols, a compass
rose to indicate directions, and scales to determine distances.

▶ According to the map, what is England’s climate?
(1) mild and humid
(2) cold and humid
The correct answer here is choice (1). To interpret information on a map, note
any labels printed directly on the map—in this case, England appears just to
the left and slightly above the center. Then check the legend to see whether
the color, shading, or symbols shown give additional information. On this
map, England is shown in gray, indicating that its climate is “mild and
humid.”

Practice 5.1
1. According to the circle graph on p. 428, the greatest portion of the Sanchez
family’s budget is spent on which two items?
A. housing and food

B. housing and entertainment
C. food and car
D. entertainment and other
2. Which of the following statements is supported by the bar graph on page
428?
A. Cuba has the highest divorce rate in the hemisphere.
B. Mexico has the lowest divorce rate in the hemisphere.
C. Mexico’s divorce rate is decreasing.
D. Brazil has a higher divorce rate than Mexico.
Questions 3 and 4 refer to the following graph.

3. Based on the graph, you may validly infer that support for third-party
candidates
during the 1980s and 1990s.
steadily increased
steadily decreased
neither increased nor decreased
fluctuated
4. The graph can be used to disprove which one of the following claims?
A. Third-party candidates have not enjoyed significant support in the 21st
century.

B. The third-party candidate who garnered the most support since 1960
was Ross Perot in 1992.
C. Third-party candidates have never captured more than 10 percent of
the popular vote in any presidential election.
D. In most elections, all third-party candidates combined get less than 5
percent of the popular vote.
Questions 5 and 6 are based on the following map.

5. What does this map show?
A. political boundaries in the ancient Americas
B. physical features of the Americas
C. how agriculture spread in the Americas
D. all ancient civilizations of the Americas
6. Which of the following statements is supported by the information on the
map?
A. Both the Andes civilization and Mesoamerica domesticated maize.
B. Both the Andes civilization and Mesoamerica domesticated beans.
C. Agriculture developed in the Andes civilization before it did in
Mesoamerica.

D. Agriculture spread more rapidly northward than southward.
Answers and explanations start on page 687.

Integrating Text and Graphic Content
In reading social studies materials and the materials you encounter in daily
life, you often have to combine text information with a graphic. For example,
an online article about a conflict in Africa may have a map. A newspaper
graph with information about new immigrants in your community may
accompany a story about their contributions to local health care and
manufacturing industries.
Practice combining information with the passage and graphic below.
Consumer confidence is an economic indicator that reflects how
optimistic consumers are about their personal finances, given the
state of the economy. When consumer confidence shows a monthly
trend of decline month after month, consumers are pessimistic about
their chances of finding and keeping good jobs. When their
confidence is low, consumers spend less—especially on nonessential
items—and tend to save more of their money. On the other hand,
when confidence is high, consumers will make more discretionary, or
optional, purchases.

Key Ideas
Some situations combine text information with a graphic.
To better understand the main point or supporting evidence, you need

to combine information from both sources.

▶ Which of the following is a valid inference based on the passage and the
graph above?
(1) Consumers in Country X likely spent a higher percentage of their
income on luxury items in March than they did in July.
(2) Unemployment in Country X is likely to remain high for the remainder
of the year shown.

GED® TEST TIP
When you see text accompanied by a graphic, read the
questions carefully. Some questions may ask about the text or
the graphic individually. Others may ask you to combine
information from both sources.
Choice (1) is correct. The graph shows that the trend in consumer confidence
has generally been in decline from March through July. The text tells you that
when consumer confidence is lower, consumers are less likely to spend,
especially on nonessential goods. These two statements combined support
choice (1). Choice (2) cannot be inferred from the information in the passage
or that in the graph. Neither of those sources provides a basis to make a
prediction about future unemployment.

Practice 5.2
Questions 1 through 3 relate to the following passage and map.
The sea otter (Enhydra lutris) is a marine mammal native to the coasts of the
northern and eastern North Pacific Ocean. At one time, southern sea otters
populated the entire coast of what is now the state of California and farther

south along Mexico’s Baja California coastline. Prior to 1741, the sea otter
population worldwide is estimated to have been 150,000–300,000.
Between 1741 and 1930, however, sea otters were hunted extensively for
their fur, and the world population fell to around 2,000 individuals. By 1930,
the wild sea otter population in California was limited exclusively to about 50
living in a small area between Big Sur and Monterey Bay.
Fortunately, the 1911 international ban on hunting and conservation efforts
and programs to reintroduce the sea otter into previously populated areas
have contributed to rebounding numbers. The Monterey Bay National Marine
Sanctuary (MBNMS) was created to protect otters and other marine life at
risk of extinction, and California sea otters now occupy about one-fourth of
their former range. Despite these successes, sea otter populations in
California have remained steady at around 3,000 individuals, and the sea otter
continues to beclassified as an endangered species.

1. According to the passage, which one of the following statements about the

sea otter is true?
A. Sea otter conservation efforts have been more successful in areas
outside of California than they have been within California.
B. Sea otter populations were threatened by water pollution as well as by
extensive hunting.
C. The sea otter population is now about one-fourth of its pre-1741
number.
D. Sea otters have been able to live in habitats from which they were once
eliminated.
2. Which of the following conclusions can be drawn from the information in
the passage and the map?
A. Sea otters will soon have the same range they had prior to 1741.
B. Sea otter habitat has been restored only within the boundaries of the
MBNMS.
C. Sea otters are still hunted in the area north of Point Ano Nuevo.
D. The current range of the sea otter in California is larger than it was in
1930.
3. The author of the passage would be most likely to agree with which of the
following statements about the information in the map?
A. The range of sea otters shown on the map indicates that sea otter
conservation programs are no longer needed.
B. The range of sea otters shown on the map is identical to the range of
sea otters prior to 1741.
C. Without conservation efforts and reintroduction programs, the range of
sea otters in California would be smaller than what is shown on the
map.
D. Ten years from now, the range of sea otters in California will be larger
than what is currently shown on the map.
Answers and explanations start on page 687.

Lesson 6: Interpret Data and Statistics
Key Ideas
Tables and graphs are commonly used to present data in social
studies materials.
A measure of central tendency is used to summarize data with one
number.
Bar graphs are used to compare data, and line graphs are used to
show trends.

Understanding social studies materials requires calculations to analyze data
or statistics, so you will do some math on the GED® Social Studies Test. This
work will include interpreting tables, finding measures of central tendency,
making comparisons, and spotting trends. You may want to review pages
280–308 of Unit 2: Mathematical Reasoning. Practice your skills with the
table below.
Franklin County Family Finances
Year

Median Income
(Family of 4)

Average % to
Taxes

Average % to
Savings

2009

$40,800

27%

5.2%

2010

$41,500

28%

6.0%

2011

$42,300

29%

5.5%

2012

$44,100

29%

5.1%

▶ What is the average (arithmetic mean) percentage of income that a family of
four in Franklin County saved each year between 2009 and 2012?
(1) 5.45 percent
(2) 5.35 percent

Choice (1) is correct. To find the average percentage saved per year, add
up the figures from the column “Average % to Savings” and divide the total
by 4, since 2009 to 2012 is four years. Thus, 5.2 + 6 + 5.5 + 5.1 = 21.8, and
dividing that number by 4 gives you 5.45.

GED® TEST TIP
When you need to compute on the GED® Social Studies Test, a
calculator symbol with the word “Calculator” will appear on
the toolbar at the top of your screen. Click on it to open the
online calculator.
Some questions may ask you to use graphs to make comparisons or to
identify trends.

▶ What of the following trends is indicated by the data in the chart?
(1) Between 2003 and 2007, foreign arrivals from overseas grew at a faster
pace than foreign arrivals from North America.

(2) Between 2003 and 2007, foreign arrivals from North America grew at a
faster pace than foreign arrivals from overseas.
Choice (2) is correct here. Foreign arrivals from North America grew from a
little over 23 million in 2003 to almost 33 million in 2007, an increase of
around 41 percent. Meanwhile, overseas arrivals rose from roughly 18
million in 2003 to just under 24 million, a change of approximately 33
percent growth.

Practice 6
Question 1 is based on the following table.
New Mexico: Population by Age, 2010
Under 18

518,672

18–19

61,169

20–24

142,370

25–34

267,245

35–49

393,362

50–64

404,106

65 & over

272,255

Total

2,059,179

Adapted from U.S. Census Bureau

1. Which of the following could have been the median age in New Mexico in
2010?
A. 30
B. 32
C. 34
D. 36

Question 2 is based on the following line graph.

2. The information in the graph supports the conclusion that in the
presidential elections from 1992 to 2012,
A. Democrats and Republicans won the presidency an equal number of
times
B. the average margin of victory was higher in years when a Democrat
won than in years when a Republican won
C. the average margin of victory was higher in years when a Republican
won than in years when a Democrat won
D. more electoral votes were cast in the 2008 presidential election than
were cast in the 1996 presidential election
Questions 3 and 4 are based on the following chart.

3. According to the bar graph, in what year were there approximately as
many Americans living in rural locations as there were in urban settings?
A. 1860
B. 1910
C. 1920
D. 1930
4. Approximately how much larger was the range of the urban population
than the range of the rural population in the United States between 1860
and 1930?
A. 10 million
B. 23 million
C. 34 million
D. 43 million
Answers and explanations start on page 687.

Social Studies Practices Practice Questions
Questions 1 and 2 are based on the following line graph-timeline
combination.

1. According to the Census Bureau’s data on the graph, it can be concluded
that the onset of World War II contributed to which change in the U.S.
unemployment rate?
A. The unemployment rate stabilized at the beginning of World War II
and remained stable until the war’s end.
B. The unemployment rate declined consistently until shortly before the
war’s end.
C. The unemployment rate decreased during World War II but remained
above the normal rate throughout the war.
D. The unemployment rate increased gradually throughout the war.
2. According to the graph, the most significant and uninterrupted change in
the U.S. unemployment rate between 1926 and 1946 occurred
immediately after
A. the stock market crash
B. FDR’s first New Deal
C. New Deal, Part 2, began

D. the U.S. enters World War II
Questions 3 and 4 are based on the following passage.
The women’s rights movement in the United States gained strength with the
1848 Seneca Falls Convention. The defining document of this gathering was
the Declaration of Sentiments, which was patterned after the Declaration of
Independence but focused on the fact that women lacked basic freedoms that
men enjoyed. The revolutionary nature of the Seneca Falls Convention was
apparent in the public’s response to the event. One newspaper described
Seneca Falls as “the most shocking and unnatural event ever recorded in the
history of womanity.”
3. Which of the following statements based on the passage is an opinion, not
a fact?
A. The Seneca Falls Convention helped the women’s rights movement
gain strength.
B. The Declaration of Sentiments was modeled on the Declaration of
Independence.
C. The Declaration of Sentiments described how women’s rights were
limited.
D. The Seneca Falls Convention was a shocking and unnatural event that
undermined the nature of women.
4. Which of the following states the main idea of the passage above?
A. Women lacked basic freedoms that men had, and they were angry.
B. The Seneca Falls Convention was open to both men and women.
C. The women’s rights movement was stronger in Seneca Falls than in the
rest of the United States.
D. The Seneca Falls Convention was important in the fight for women’s
rights.
Questions 5 and 6 refer to the following map.

5. Which of the following conclusions is supported by this map?
A. More than half of the reported cases of human plague in the United
States between 1970 and 2010 were reported in four states.
B. More than 99 percent of diphtheria-related deaths in the United States
between 1970 and 2010 occurred in the western half of the United
States.
C. The majority of reported cases of plague in the American Southwest
spread from one infected person.
D. In the United States, human plague most frequently occurs within
larger cities, where the risk of contagion is greatest.
6. The map above could be used to disprove which of the following claims?
A. There were more cases of plague in the United States between 2000
and 2010 than there were between 1990 and 2000.
B. Although many cases of plague have been reported in the United States
since 1970, no deaths have been reported.
C. Several cases of plague were reported on the East Coast of the United
States between 1970 and 2010.
D. Plague is less virulent in colder climates than it is in warmer climates.
Questions 7 and 8 are based on the following passage and chart.

The invention of the cotton gin by Eli Whitney in 1784 revolutionized the
cotton industry in the American South. The separation of the cotton seeds and
fibers, once a painstaking task that slaves performed by hand, could now be
done quickly by machine. This made cotton goods more affordable, thereby
increasing international demand for these goods and, consequently, the
profits of cotton farmers. Ironically, however, the cotton gin did not reduce
the South’s reliance on slavery. In fact, with the boom of the cotton industry,
more slaves were used to pick the cotton at a faster rate to keep up with the
increasing demand for cotton.

7. Which of the following conclusions is supported by the passage?
A. Eli Whitney invented the cotton gin with the hope that it would reduce
slavery.
B. The cotton gin had little impact on the cotton industry in the South.
C. After the invention of the cotton gin, many plantation owners found
that they needed fewer slaves.
D. The effects of the cotton gin on the cotton industry actually led to an
increased demand for slaves in the South.
8. According to the graph, approximately how much greater was the increase
in the number of cotton bales produced between 1840 and 1860 than the
increase in the number of slaves during the same interval?
A. 750,000
B. 1,500,000

C. 2,000,000
D. 4,000,000
Directions: You MAY use your calculator to answer the following
questions.
Questions 9 and 10 are based on the following graph:

The above graph shows the percent increase, year by year, in the populations
of each of North Dakota and South Dakota over eleven years.
9. Which of the following statements about the eleven-year period is
supported by the graph above?
A. North Dakota’s population increased every year, while South Dakota’s
stayed the same.
B. The population of South Dakota was originally greater than that of
North Dakota, but in 2012, the population of North Dakota was greater
than that of South Dakota.
C. In most years, the percent population increase in South Dakota was
greater than that in North Dakota.
D. In most years, the percent population increase in North Dakota was
greater than that in South Dakota.

10. Based on the graph above, the average percent increase in population per
year for North Dakota was
the average percent increase in
population per year for South Dakota for the period shown.
greater than
equal to
less than
Question 11 is based on the following graphic.

The chart above shows the percentage of registered voters who voted in
presidential and midterm elections from 1980 to 2008.
11. The average voter turnout for midterm elections is approximately
of the average voter turnout for presidential elections.
10 percent
25 percent
50 percent
70 percent
Question 12 is based on the following chart.
Average Federal Tax Rates for All Households, by Household Income

Quintile, 2005–2009
Year

Lowest
Quintile

Second
Quintile

Middle
Quintile

Fourth
Quintile

Highest
Quintile

2005

5.4

9.9

13.8

17.6

25.4

2006

5.7

9.9

13.9

17.7

25.4

2007

5.1

10.3

14.0

17.5

24.7

2008

1.5

7.3

11.6

15.6

23.6

2009

1.0

6.8

11.1

15.1

23.2

12. According to the chart, from 2005 to 2009, the median tax rate for
households in the middle income quintile was
A. 11.6 percent
B. 12.8 percent
C. 13.8 percent
D. 14.0 percent
Answers and explanations start on page 688.

CHAPTER 2

U.S. History
Lesson 1: Exploration, Colonialism, and the
American Revolution
Key Ideas
European explorers sought wealth and conquest in the New World
from the 1400s to the 1600s.
The Thirteen Colonies declared independence from England in 1776.
America won its independence in 1783 and ratified the U.S.
Constitution in 1788.

The first Americans traveled from Asia across the Bering Strait into North
America and, over many generations, down to South America. Called Native
Americans, they established extensive tribal cultures and several advanced
civilizations.
In the late 1400s, explorers from Europe searched for a sea route to Asia so
they could trade for Asian gold and spices. They traveled around the tip of

Africa. However, in 1492 Christopher Columbus convinced Spain to finance
a trip west, across the Atlantic Ocean. When he reached land, he thought he
had found India and called the inhabitants Indians. Later explorers realized
that they had found a “New World,” and many European nations set out to
establish colonies there. The first explorers were searching for valuable
resources and for the glory of conquest. This colonization led to tragedy for
many Native Americans who died from diseases or were killed, enslaved, or
forced off their lands.
In the 1500s and 1600s, European nations, including Spain, France, England,
and the Netherlands, established settlements in North America. Settlements
were established to gain power and wealth or to provide colonists a place for
permanent residence. The first permanent English settlement was established
in Jamestown, Virginia, in 1607. In 1620, the Pilgrims sailed to the Americas
aboard the Mayflower and established a second English colony in Massachusetts. Beginning about 1675, colonists began importing a large number of
slaves who had been forcibly taken from Africa. Many were put to work on
the plantation system in the Southern colonies.

GED® TEST TIP
Reviewing key vocabulary can help you prepare for the GED®
Test. As you review, look up any words that you do not
understand. Pay special attention to the words in bold type.
The colonies grew rapidly in the early 1700s. When England defeated France
in the French and Indian War (1754–1763), England acquired many of
France’s American colonies. After the war, England sought to regain more
control over the Thirteen Colonies. It also sought to recover economically
from the debts caused by the costly war. New British taxes and policies
troubled the colonists; however, it was not until 1775 that a war for
independence seemed inevitable. After a series of skirmishes, the
Continental Congress assigned George Washington to lead the Continental
Army and ordered publication of the Declaration of Independence on July
4, 1776.

Despite the superiority of the well-trained British forces, the Americans had
the advantage of defending their own land and eventually forged a fighting
force with strong military leaders. The American Revolution lasted until the
surrender of the British at Yorktown in 1781. In 1783, the final treaty to end
the war resulted in the recognition of American independence. The new
nation initially formed a weak national government through the Articles of
Confederation. This first effort stressed a loose confederation of the states
with strong local control. Over time, many colonial leaders recognized the
need for a centralized government. The principles of this government were
established in the U.S. Constitution, which was ratified in 1788. To counter
fears of an overly powerful government, the first ten amendments to the
Constitution, the Bill of Rights, promised many individual freedoms, such as
freedom of speech and assembly.

Practice 1
Questions 1 and 2 refer to the following map.

1. Choose the correct phrase that would fill in the blank.
Based on the map,
had the southernmost colony in 1650.
the Dutch
the English
the Spanish
the Swedish
2. Which of the following conclusions is supported by the map?
A. By 1650, Spain had conquered most of North America.
B. The English established several colonies in the New World.
C. The Dutch established their colonies in the western part of North
America.
D. French colonies extended along the East Coast between Boston and

Jamestown.
3. Some of the early colonists did not come to the New World to gain power
and wealth. These groups came seeking freedom from persecution.
Which immigrant group is most similar to those early colonists?
A. African slaves who were involuntarily brought to work on plantations
B. Mexican workers who came to the United States to earn better wages
than they could at home
C. British businessmen who visited the United States to invest in media
companies
D. Haitian refugees who fled to the United States to escape a dictatorship
4. According to the information on page 438, which of the following was a
cause of the American Revolution?
A. France’s defeat in the French and Indian War
B. increased British taxes and restrictions on the colonies
C. Britain’s acquisition of France’s colonies in North America
D. the publication of the Declaration of Independence
5. The first amendment to the U.S. Constitution states: “Congress shall make
no law abridging the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to
petition the government for a redress of grievances.”
Based on the passage on page 438, what is the most likely reason the
framers of the Constitution included these guarantees?
A. They were planning to organize assemblies.
B. They were concerned about the government becoming tyrannical.
C. They were hoping to petition the government.
D. They were attempting to prevent a redress of grievances.
Answers and explanations start on page 688.

Lesson 2: Westward Expansion, the Civil
War, and Reconstruction
Key Ideas
The economy of the South was based on slavery. The Northern
economy was based on paid labor.
Conflict over whether slavery should be allowed in the nation’s new
western territories led to the Civil War.
The North won the war and ended slavery. During Reconstruction,
the South was rebuilt.

Early on in the history of the United States, the North and the South diverged
economically. The North developed a varied economy that included industry
and commerce as well as agriculture. Slavery had been legal throughout the
North during the colonial period. However, by the early 1800s, it was
abolished in all Northern states. Women and immigrants, as well as men,
provided labor for the growing economy in the North.
The Southern economy was based largely on agriculture. By the 1800s, there
was one major crop in the South: cotton. Planting and harvesting cotton
required a lot of labor. Southern farmers came to depend more and more on
slaves to do the work, and the number of enslaved persons grew in the South.
As the United States expanded during the early 1800s, the North and the
South worked to maintain a balance of power. New states were generally
added in pairs, one slave and one free. But there was increasing tension over
the vast western territory that had become part of the United States by the
mid-1800s. In the 1850s, Congress voted that the territories themselves
should decide whether or not to allow slavery. This soon led to war in
Kansas. People from both the North and the South rushed to settle the territory. Voter fraud in the 1855 elections led to the setup of two warring
governments. The violence in Kansas foreshadowed the violence that soon
tore up the nation.

In the late 1850s, political parties fractured over the slavery issue. Four
candidates ran for president in 1860. Abraham Lincoln, who promised to halt
the spread of slavery (although not abolish it where it already existed) won.
Opposed to Lincoln’s policies, most slave states seceded from the United
States. They set up their own government, called the Confederacy. By April
1861, the United States (called the Union) and the Confederacy were at war.

GED® TEST TIP
As you study for the GED® Social Studies Test, focus on
analyzing events to understand causes and effects, rather than
memorizing names and dates.
At first it seemed as if the Confederacy might win. They had well-trained
military leaders and soldiers who were willing to fight hard to hold onto their
way of life, so the Confederacy won many early battles. However, by the
summer of 1863, the Confederacy began to wear down. Ammunition,
uniforms, and shoes were in short supply for Confederate soldiers because
the South lacked industry. There were food shortages for soldiers and
civilians alike. The war was fought mostly in the South, and the destruction
was terrible. After four long years, in 1865, Confederate general Robert E.
Lee surrendered to Union general Ulysses S. Grant. The Civil War ended.
For the next 12 years, federal troops oversaw the rebuilding of the South.
This period was called Reconstruction. Schools were established for former
slaves, who were all freed when the war ended. However, the sharecropping
system, which kept black farmers enslaved economically, soon came into
being. Whites who came back to power as Reconstruction ended in the South
in the 1870s prevented African Americans from exercising their right to vote.
The Civil War ended slavery, but it did not end racism.

Practice 2

1. Based on the passage on page 440, which of the following disagreements
was a main cause of the Civil War?
A. whether cotton should be the main crop in the South
B. whether slavery should continue to exist
C. whether the United States should expand westward
D. whether slavery should be permitted in territories in the West
2. In 1820, Missouri proposed to enter the Union as a slave state. Based on
the passage, what do you think was the response of Northerners in
Congress?
A. They supported having another slave state join the Union.
B. They lobbied against having Missouri join the Union at all.
C. To balance the admission of Missouri, they agreed to a compromise in
which Maine was admitted as a free state.
D. They started a war to prevent Missouri from attaining statehood.
3. In the mid-1950s, the country of Vietnam was divided. There was a
communist government in the North and a noncommunist government in
the South. The two fought for control of Vietnam. In 1975, the
communists won. Vietnam was united under this form of government.
Because both wars
, the Vietnam War and the U.S. Civil War
can be said to share some similarities.
involved racial conflict
saw the addition of new territory upset the balance of power
concluded with the formation of new nations
concluded with the reunification of the nation
Questions 4 and 5 refer to the following photographs of people who
served in South Carolina’s state government in 1868.

4. Which of the following is a fact confirmed by information in the
photographs?
A. Southern Democrats were treated very well during Reconstruction.
B. It was unfair that former Confederate soldiers could vote during
Reconstruction.
C. In 1868, many African Americans served in the government of South
Carolina.
D. The most qualified leaders in South Carolina government in 1868 were
African Americans.
5. Which of the following conclusions is supported by the photographs and
the passage on page 440?
A. Over the course of Reconstruction, African Americans in the South
gained and then lost political power.
B. Over the course of Reconstruction, African Americans in the South lost
and then gained political power.
C. Over the course of Reconstruction, whites in the South gained and then
lost political power.
D. In the early years of Reconstruction, African Americans served in
government in each Southern state.

Answers and explanations start on page 689.

Lesson 3: Industrialization,
Immigration,and the Progressive Era
Key Ideas
The U.S. underwent rapid industrialization starting in the mid-1800s.
Immigrants came from many places to work in the expanding
American industries.
Rapid industrialization brought problems, which labor unions and
reformers tried to solve, especially during the Progressive Era.

In the mid-1800s, American industries, which had been growing steadily
since the late 1700s, began a period of extremely fast growth. This rapid
industrialization occurred for several interconnected reasons. With the
addition of the vast western territories, the United States gained plentiful
natural resources. Among these resources were materials, such as metals,
needed to manufacture new products and machines, and fuels, such as coal,
needed to run these machines. Another reason for rapid industrialization was
the invention of many new machines and new industrial processes. With
these new inventions and processes, manufactured goods could be produced
more easily, more efficiently, and less expensively. A third reason for the
rapid industrialization was the nation’s booming population. The U.S.
population more than doubled in the last 40 years of the 1800s. There were
more people to buy more goods, spurring commerce and further industrial
growth.
Rapid industrialization meant that many new factories were built in the midand late-1800s. Most were built in or near the nation’s large cities, including
New York, Boston, Chicago, Philadelphia, and Pittsburgh. These urban
centers had large groups of people who could work in the factories and large
groups of people who would buy the goods the factories produced.

U.S. factory jobs drew many immigrants to American cities. Although the
United States has always been a “nation of immigrants,” the late 1800s saw a
sharp rise in the number of people moving here from foreign countries. The
majority came from Europe, including Germany, Italy, Russia, and Eastern
European countries. Many also came from Mexico and Central America.
Asian immigration was declining because the government had passed laws
barring Chinese from moving to the United States. However, thousands of
Japanese came to this country, taking jobs in farm fields and mines.

ON THE GED® TEST
The GED® Social Studies Test examines your ability to
interpret graphs, charts, maps, and other visual sources of
information.
America’s factory workers, whether native- or foreign-born, worked very
hard at grueling, dangerous work. Many received low pay for long hours on
the job. Over time, workers began to unionize. By joining a union, workers
pledged to work together for better and safer working conditions and higher
wages. They called strikes when their employers cut their pay or refused to
grant raises. Many of the laws we have today, including the eight-hour
workday and the five-day workweek, came about through the bitter struggles
for better working conditions that unions waged in the late 1800s and the
early 1900s.
Unions weren’t the only groups working to solve problems brought on by
America’s rapid industrialization. Some reformers worked to clean up slums,
improve health care, and stop child labor. Others worked to preserve the
nation’s natural beauty by creating national parks. Still others worked to give
more people a voice in government. For example, many women lobbied to
gain the right to vote. In the early 1900s, groups were working toward so
many sweeping social and political improvements that the time is called the
Progressive Era.

Practice 3
Questions 1 through 4 are based on the information on page 442.
1. Which of the following likely occurs during a period of rapid
industrialization?
A. the annexation of new territory
B. an increase in manufacturing
C. an increase in population
D. an increase in immigration
2. Which event most likely contributed to the growth of American industries
in the mid-1800s?
A. the passage of the Chinese Exclusion Act, which banned Chinese
immigration
B. the passage of the Sherman Antitrust Act, which helped prevent
businesses from forming monopolies
C. the development of the Bessemer process, which made it easier to
produce steel
D. the development of settlement houses to aid impoverished immigrants
and city dwellers
3. Based on the passage, which of the following would early union workers
have valued the most?
A. productivity in the workplace
B. contact with people of all different backgrounds
C. cooperation with others to improve worker safety
D. the freedom to work whenever they pleased
4. What was a strong ideal held by people working toward reforms during the
Progressive Era?
A. efficiency
B. wealth

C. artistic beauty
D. fairness
Questions 5 and 6 refer to the following graphs.

5. Which of the following best completes this statement? In the 1890s, the
vast majority of persons gaining permanent legal residency came from
Europe, whereas in the early 2000s, a majority of such persons came from
.
Europe and Asia
Asia and the Americas
Africa, Oceania, and Europe
6. You MAY use your calculator to answer this question.
Based on the graphs, which of the following is true of the number of
persons who came from Europe and gained legal permanent resident
status?
A. In the 1890s, that number was roughly seven times what it was in the
period of 2000–2009.
B. In the 1890s, that number was less than what it was in the period of
2000–2009.

C. In the 1890s, that number was roughly three times what it was in the
period of 2000–2009.
D. In the 1890s, that number was the same as what it was in the period of
2000–2009.
Answers and explanations start on page 689.

Lesson 4: The United States asan Emerging
World Power
Key Ideas
Industrialization spurred U.S. interest in gaining access to the raw
materials and markets of other countries.
The U.S. pursued imperialist policies in the late 1800s.
The U.S. entered both WWI and WWII on the side of the Allies and
contributed to their winning both wars.

The expansion of U.S. industries in the mid-1800s had an effect not only on
the nation’s economy but also on its politics. Business and government
leaders wanted access to more natural resources, which industries needed to
continue growing. They also wanted to be able to sell more goods overseas.
Regions in Africa, Asia, and Latin America had rich natural resources. People
in these regions might buy what Americans wanted to sell. To promote
industrial growth and increase its power, the United States became
imperialistic. Imperialism is the policy by which a stronger nation extends
economic, military, and/or political control over a weaker nation or region.
European nations had been engaging in imperialism for many centuries. In
the late 1800s, the United States joined in. In 1898, the United States fought
the Spanish-American War. Ostensibly, the United States declared war on
Spain because of Spain’s mistreatment of Cuba, which was a Spanish colony.
Yet, after winning the war, the United States took over Spain’s colonies of

Cuba, Puerto Rico, the Philippines, and Guam. It granted independence to
none of them.
The next war the United States was involved in was World War I, which
began in Europe in 1913. It pitted two groups of nations against each other.
One group was called the Allies; the leading Allied nations included Great
Britain, Russia, and France. The other group was called the Central Powers,
which included Germany, Austria-Hungary, and the Ottoman Empire. The
Allies and Central Powers fought for three years in what fast became a deadly
stalemate. Then, in 1917, the United States, alarmed over Germany’s sinking
of American ships, joined the Allies. With American help, in November 1918
the Allies defeated the Central Powers, and World War I ended.

GED® TEST TIP
When weighing answer choices, immediately eliminate ones
that are directly contradicted by information in the passage or
graphic.
Because the destruction was so terrible, some people called World War I “the
war to end all wars.” However, this was not to be. Within 12 years, by 1929,
the world had fallen into a serious economic downturn, which Americans
called the Great Depression. Economic problems aided the rise of fascism
in Europe and elsewhere. Fascist nations squelched democracy and advocated
the takeover of other nations. Germany, led by fascist dictator Adolf Hitler,
started attacking smaller nations in Europe in the mid-1930s. Italy fought to
take over Ethiopia, in Africa. Japan attacked China. Hitler built an alliance
with Italy and Japan, which came to be called the Axis. By 1939, war again
broke out between the Axis and the Allies.
The United States did not enter World War II until 1941, when the Japanese
bombed the U.S. naval base at Pearl Harbor in Hawaii. This time, Americans
fought not only in Europe but also in Africa and Asia as well. With its
horrific battles, the fire-bombing of cities, the Holocaust, and the dropping of
two atomic bombs on Japan, World War II led to massive destruction. The

United States, which played a major part in the Allied victory in World War
II in 1945, also played a major part in helping to rebuild war-scourged
nations after the war was over.

Practice 4
Question 1 refers to the following chart.
Factors Related to the Growth of Imperialism
Economic

Desire for greater access to natural
resources or new markets

Military

Desire for control of ports that could serve
as refueling stations for long sea voyages or
air flights

Political

Desire to spread the institutions
of democracy or other political systems

Religious

Desire to spread Christianity or other faith

Cultural/Racial

Lack of respect for different cultures or
races

1. Cuba lies about 90 miles off the coast of Florida. After the United States
freed Cuba from Spanish rule in 1898, the U.S. Navy built an important
base there.
Circle the factor in the chart above that best explains the situation in Cuba
after 1898.
2. What assumption do you need to make to fully understand the last
sentence in paragraph 4 on page 444?
A. In World War I, the Allies fought the Central Powers.
B. In World War II, the Allies included England, France, and Russia.
C. In World War II, the Allies included the Germans, Austrians, and

Ottoman Turks.
D. In World War II, the Axis included Germany, Italy, and Japan.
3. Franklin D. Roosevelt became president during the height of the Great
Depression, in 1933. He soon instituted a set of federal programs called
the New Deal to try to lower unemployment.
Which conclusion about the effectiveness of New Deal programs does the
text on page 444 and graph below support?

A. Within a year, the New Deal had raised unemployment to its preDepression level.
B. Within a year, the New Deal had lowered unemployment to its preDepression level.
C. Unemployment fell after the start of the New Deal and continued to
fall sharply as the United States entered World War II.
D. The New Deal lowered unemployment, but Allied victory in World
War II lowered it further.
4. Which statement best summarizes the main idea of paragraph 5 on page
444?
A. America entered World War II in 1941.
B. Americans fought in Europe, Africa, and Asia.
C. World War II involved more nations than any other war ever fought.
D. America took a strong leadership role during and after World War II.

Answers and explanations start on page 689.

Lesson 5: The Cold War and the Civil
Rights Era
Key Ideas
The Cold War dominated U.S. foreign policy from the end of WWII
until the fall of the Soviet Union.
Social changes in the U.S. in the mid-1900s included the expansion
of civil rights for minorities.
Technological advances have introduced benefits but also caused
problems.

After World War II ended, the capitalist and communist nations soon began
engaging in a power struggle called the Cold War. Leading the capitalist
nations was the United States; leading the communist nations was the Soviet
Union. The Cold War never led to direct fighting between these two
superpowers, although there was a constant threat of nuclear war. Clashes
between communism and capitalism did lead to numerous smaller conflicts.
These included the Korean War of the early 1950s and the Vietnam War,
which lasted from 1954 to 1975. The United States sent soldiers to both. The
Vietnam War was long and difficult and caused deep division among
Americans. The United States sent massive military aid to the noncommunist
South Vietnamese, but they kept losing to the communist North Vietnamese.
Although a few Americans wanted to continue fighting, in 1973 America
pulled out of Vietnam. In 1975, the communists took over the country.
The Cold War ended in 1991 with the breakup of the Soviet Union and the
end of communism there. In the late 1980s, Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev
had tried to reform the communist government. But the loosening of Soviet
control had led to the collapse of many communist governments of Eastern
Europe. The Berlin Wall, which had separated East and West Germany, was

torn down. With communism no longer so threatening, world politics became
less tense but also more unpredictable.

ON THE GED® TEST
The GED® Social Studies Test will include some questions that
focus on the role of the United States in the world.
During the second half of the 20th century, the United States continued to
face many challenges. In the 1950s, African American leaders launched the
civil rights movement to try to end segregation and discrimination in the
United States. Among their victories included the integration of public
schools and other public facilities, the passage of laws protecting the voting
rights of minorities, and the striking down of laws that permitted overt
discrimination based on race or cultural background. However, minority
groups and people of all backgrounds concerned about fair application of the
law have continued to be vigilant in insisting that civil rights laws be upheld.
Another area of challenge in recent decades has been technology.
Technology has led to many advances in science, medicine, and our personal
lives. Computers, for instance, make many jobs easier and more productive.
They allow almost instantaneous communication with coworkers, family, and
friends. Furthermore, they allow people from around the world to share
information quickly and easily, giving us the sense that we live in a “global
village.” However, our reliance on the use of technology has led us to pollute
the air with exhaust from a growing number of cars. It has led us to pollute
the water with acid rain, resulting from burning coal to generate increased
electricity. It has led us to pollute our land with mountains of trash and tons
of hazardous wastes.

Practice 5
Questions 1 and 3 through 5 are based on the information on page 446.

1. The conflict during the second half of the twentieth century between the
United States and the Soviet Union was called the Cold War because it
involved (1)
. In 1991, the (2)
finally brought the
Cold War to an end.
Select (1)

Select (2)

communists and capitalists

destruction of the Berlin Wall

two countries at the far north of
Earth

dissolution of the Soviet Union

the threat of nuclear war

separation of East and West
Germany

no direct combat

death of Mikhail Gorbachev

2. Which of the following best summarizes the message of the cartoon
below?

A. Nuclear bombs are extremely destructive.
B. Expanding U.S. nuclear capabilities is a good idea.
C. The buildup of nuclear arms increases fear and instability, not peace.
D. The threat of nuclear war is lessened if both superpowers have equally
powerful weapons.
3. Which of the following statements about the Vietnam War is a false
generalization?
A. Some Americans served in both Korea and Vietnam.
B. The United States sent massive military aid to South Vietnam.
C. Americans were in complete agreement about pulling out of Vietnam.
D. The Vietnam War lasted much longer than the Korean War.
4. Which of the following goals would a civil rights activist be most likely to
pursue?
A. getting Congress to enact laws to restrict the sale of firearms

B. petitioning for a city ordinance requiring those selling real estate to
select a buyer without regard to race
C. getting local companies to stop polluting the environment
D. working with local clergy to publicize a worship service open to people of all religions
5. Which of the following is a conclusion about technology rather than a
supporting detail?
A. Reliance on technology has increased pollution.
B. Cars cause air pollution.
C. Coal-generating power plants cause acid-rain pollution.
D. The ease of manufacturing disposable items has led to land pollution at
landfill sites.
Answers and explanations start on page 690.

U.S. History Practice Questions
Questions 1 and 2 refer to the timeline below.

1. Which of the following is a conclusion based on multiple details in the
timeline?
A. The Cherokee had begun farming around 800, before Europeans came
to America.
B. Although the Cherokee adopted many aspects of white culture, they
were driven off their ancestral lands.
C. The Cherokee traditionally considered land ownership to be a tribal

matter rather than a right of individuals acting on their own.
D. The Bible was one of the first books the Cherokee translated into their
written language.
2. When President Andrew Jackson mandated that the Cherokee move west
in 1830, he claimed that the U.S. government would be better able to
protect the Cherokee from whites who might try to get their new land in
the West. The Cherokee considered this to be illogical.
Which of the following summarizes the logical fallacy?
A. If the government can’t protect us from white settlers here, now, how could it protect us from whites moving west in the future?
B. If you ask us to move to the West now, how do we know you won’t
ask us to move back to the South in the future?
C. If the land we have in the South is good, why wouldn’t the land in the
West be better?
D. If the state governments are protecting us now, why can’t the U.S.
government help later?
3. In the late 1700s, Abigail Adams—wife of John Adams, who was our
nation’s second president—wrote the following in a letter to her sister:
I will never consent to have our sex considered in an inferior point of light.
Let each planet shine in their [its] own orbit . . . if man is Lord, woman is
Lordess—that is what I contend for.
Based on this letter, which of the following principles was Abigail Adams
advocating?
A. the separation of church and state
B. the abolition of slavery
C. the promotion of scientific learning
D. equal rights and opportunities for women
Questions 4 and 5 refer to the following map.

4. List four states that permitted slavery but did not join the Confederacy.

5. The loyalty of Maryland was of crucial importance to the Union. Based on
the map, which statement best explains why this was so?
A. The nation’s capital was located nearby.
B. The Confederate capital was located there.
C. It was close to Fort Sumter, where the Civil War began.
D. Important rail lines ran through Baltimore, Maryland.
6. In the Emancipation Proclamation, issued in 1863, President Lincoln freed
all people enslaved in the states that had seceded from the Union. This
proclamation was explicitly not to be put into effect in slave states that
had remained in the Union. The proclamation went on to say:
I hereby enjoin upon the people so declared to be free to abstain from all
violence . . . and make known that such persons of suitable condition will

be received into the armed services of the United States to garrison forts,
positions, stations, and other places, and to man vessels of all sorts.
Based on the information given about the Emancipation Proclamation and
the text of the order itself, which of the following was a major reason
Lincoln issued the proclamation?
A. to encourage states to secede from the Union
B. to punish slaveholders throughout the South
C. to weaken the North by enlisting former slaves in the Confederate
army
D. to weaken the South by enlisting former slaves in the Union army
Questions 7 through 9 refer to the following chart.
Civil Rights Amendment and Laws
14th Amendment
(1868)

Granted citizenship and equal protection of the law
to all persons born in the United States (not applied
to American Indians)

15th Amendment
(1870)

Granted voting rights to African Americans

Civil Rights Act of
1875

Gave African Americans the right to serve on juries
Banned racial segregation in public places

Civil Rights Act of
1964

Outlawed segregation by race in public places and
racial discrimination in employment

Voting Rights Act of Prohibited literacy tests for voting Allowed the
1965
federal government to register voters
Civil Rights Act of
1968

Outlawed discrimination in the sale or rental of
homes

7. An Asian American registers to vote and is given a reading test. Place a
dot in the cell from the chart above containing the civil rights amendment
or law relevant to this situation.

8. Which statement best summarizes what this chart shows about voting
rights?
A. African Americans were granted the vote five years after the Civil War
ended.
B. African Americans were granted the vote 100 years after the Civil War
ended.
C. African Americans were granted the vote soon after the Civil War, but
laws enforcing these rights had to be passed a century later.
D. African Americans were granted the vote in 1870 but American
Indians were never granted these same rights.
9. How are the Civil Rights Act of 1875 and the Civil Rights Act of 1964
similar?
A. They both guaranteed African Americans citizenship rights.
B. They both prohibited the legal separation of people by race in public
places.
C. They both ensured that African Americans could serve on juries.
D. They both make job discrimination illegal.
10. Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in the spring of 1876. In
the fall, he exhibited it at an exposition in Philadelphia. When leading
scientists saw Bell’s invention, they said, “Here is the greatest marvel ever
achieved in electrical science.”
Which of the following statements related to the passage is an opinion, not
a fact?
A. >Bell invented the telephone in 1876.
B. Bell exhibited the telephone at an exposition in Philadelphia.
C. Scientists admired Bell’s invention.
D. The telephone was the greatest electrical invention ever.
Questions 11 through 13 are based on the paragraph and the political
cartoon below.

In 1974, President Richard Nixon resigned from office. He had been involved
in a scandal known as Watergate. The Watergate scandal implicated Nixon in
covering up crimes committed by members of his reelection committee.
These crimes ranged from illegally harassing political opponents to burglary
and bribery. With Congress investigating him, he was sure to be impeached.
This cartoon was published before Nixon resigned to avoid impeachment.

11. In this cartoon, whom is Nixon addressing?
A. the writers of the Declaration of Independence
B. the framers of the U.S. Constitution
C. the past presidents of the United States
D. the present session of Congress
12. Which value was Congress furthering by investigating Nixon and
Watergate?
A. the pursuit of justice
B. the duty of obedience
C. loyalty to a friend
D. love of mercy
13. About Watergate, one historian has written, “In a society in which
distrust of leaders and institutions of authority was already widespread,
the fall of Richard Nixon seemed to confirm the most cynical assumptions

about the character of American public life.”
Based on the information on page 446, which of the following was most
likely a reason for Americans’ growing distrust of their government in the
years just prior to Watergate?
A. mismanagement of the New Deal
B. the beginning of rock music
C. the escalation and failure of the Vietnam War
D. the scandals of previous presidents, including John Kennedy and Bill
Clinton
Questions 14 and 15 refer to the graph below.

14. In 1990, approximately how many people of Cuban nationality lived in
the United States?
A. 100
B. 100,000
C. 1,000,000
D. 5,000,000
15. A Hispanic family moved into an apartment next door to yours in 1990.
Based solely on the bar graph, which place was the family most likely to
be from?
A. Cuba

B. Mexico
C. Puerto Rico
D. Spain
Answers and explanations start on page 690.

CHAPTER 3

Civics and Government
Lesson 1: Historic Basis for U.S. System
Key Ideas
The idea of democracy originated with the Ancient Greeks who spoke
of the “rule of the people.”
The historic basis of the U.S. government came from the British
system that limited the king’s powers and protected individual rights.
The U.S. system evolved from the British idea of a parliamentary
democracy to a representative democracy.

The system of government in the United States is known as representative
democracy. In this form of government, the citizens vote to elect representatives who make and execute laws. To understand this form of democracy, it
is helpful to first distinguish democracy from other types of government.
Then, you can trace the historical development of democracy and see how
representative democracy differs from other types of democracy employed
over time and around the globe.

The origins of democracy are ancient. The term democracy, which means
“rule of the people” in Greek, arose in approximately 500 B.C.E. in the Greek
city-state of Athens. This distinguishes democracy from monarchy, the “rule
of one person” (such as a king or queen); aristocracy, the “rule of an elite
class” (lords or barons, for example); theocracy, the “rule of the church”; and
anarchy, the “rule of the mob” (arguably not a form of government at all).
Democracy is also distinct from forms of authoritarian rule, such as
dictatorship, military rule, and fascism.
In ancient Athenian democracy, laws were voted upon by a council of all
citizens, a system known as direct democracy. In ancient Athens, however, a
“citizen” was defined as a free male landowner over the age of 20. Women,
foreigners, slaves, non-landowners, and minors were excluded from the vote.
For the eventual development of democracy in the U.S., one of the most
important events was the signing of the Magna Carta (Latin for Great
Charter) in England in 1215. England was a monarchy, but some protested
the king’s absolute power. The result was the signing of the Magna Carta, a
document limiting the king’s rule and subjecting his decisions to review. This
same period also saw the development of the legal doctrine of habeas
corpus, which made it illegal for the government to hold or imprison
individuals without granting them trials.

ON THE GED® TEST
While you will not need to memorize dates, it will be helpful to
be familiar with key terms, such as the ones in bold type.
Over time, the group allowed by the Magna Carta to review the king’s
decisions developed into a parliament of lawmakers appointed by title
and/or elected by citizens. As the power of the parliament grew, England
transformed into a parliamentary democracy. In this system, a government
is formed by the party holding a majority of seats in the parliament. In most
parliamentary democracies, the majority party appoints or authorizes the
chief executive, such as the president.

Known as the Age of Enlightenment, the 17th and 18th centuries saw the
spread of democracy to many other European countries. England, France,
Holland, and other European powers also adopted bills of rights for
individuals during this period. The philosophies dominant in this era
emphasized reason and individual rights and encouraged government by the
people. Enlightenment philosophers such as Adam Smith, John Locke, and
Voltaire strongly influenced the founders of the United States.

Practice 1
Questions 1 through 5 are based on the information on page 452.
Directions: Match each choice in the box corresponding to the form of
government that best matches the description.
1.
Direct Democracy
Monarchy
Representative Democracy
Aristocracy
Choices:
In Country A, laws are made and administered by lords who inherit their
lands and titles.
In Country B, laws are made by a sovereign king and are subject to no
review.
In Country C, laws are made by Congress, an elected group of
representatives.
In Country D, laws are made by the vote of all citizens.

Directions: For Questions 2 through 5, choose the one best answer to
each question.
2. Which of following can be inferred about the Founding Fathers of the
United States?
A. They sought to establish the power of the king of England in the
United States.
B. They were concerned about protecting the rights of individuals.
C. They argued that the United States should adopt a system of direct
democracy.
D. They thought representatives from the United States should sit in
Parliament.
3. In the United States, laws are enacted by Congress, a group of
representatives elected by the people. Which of the following was most
likely the chief historical model for the U.S. Congress?
A. Athenian council of citizens
B. Magna Carta
C. Parliament of England
D. Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen adopted in France in
1789
4. Some nations have been ruled by a form of government known as
constitutional monarchy. While a king or queen is the single, sovereign
ruler of the country, his or her power is limited by a constitution, a formal
document outlining which of the monarch’s decisions are subject to
review or may be overruled by a court of law.
Which of the following was most likely a constitutional monarchy?
A. the ancient city-state of Athens
B. any country ruled by fascism
C. the United States at the time of its founding
D. England during the Age of Enlightenment

5. If the United States were a parliamentary democracy, which of the
following would be most likely to occur?
A. The office of the president would decrease in power.
B. The office of the president would increase in power.
C. The president would be elected by a majority vote of all citizens.
D. The president would be appointed by the majority party in parliament.
Answers and explanations start on page 691.

Lesson 2: Constitutional Government
Key Ideas
The U.S. Constitution is the basis for our government structure and
legal system.
The Bill of Rights—the first ten constitutional amendments—define the
rights of citizens.
Amendments to the Constitution require wide support, but many
important amendments have gained enough support to be ratified.
The Constitution of the United States is the foundation of our national
government and legal system. The United States is a republic, a form of
government in which citizens elect the people who will govern them. A
republic is very different from a government system in which citizens do not
choose their political leaders, such as a monarchy or dictatorship.
The people who wrote the Constitution set particular goals for the new
nation, which they stated in the preamble, or introduction. They wanted to
unite the states under one government, establish a nation where people could
live peacefully and safely under the rule of law, and make prosperity and
freedom possible for all citizens.
Following the preamble are the original seven articles of the U.S.
Constitution. These articles provide for the three branches of government (see

page 456), establish the rights of states, and set forth procedures for ratifying
and amending the Constitution. Article 6 states that all government officials
must uphold the Constitution as “the supreme law of the land” and that no
other laws can contradict any part of the Constitution.
According to Article 5, a constitutional amendment can be proposed by
Congress if it is supported by two-thirds majorities in both the House and
Senate. The proposed amendment then must be ratified by three-fourths of
the states. This process ensures that amendments have very broad national
support.

ON THE GED® TEST
The GED® Social Studies Test may include an excerpt from or
a reference to one of the following U.S. historical documents:
Declaration of Independence
U.S. Constitution, including the Bill of Rights and other
amendments
Landmark Supreme Court cases

The original Constitution did not specifically describe citizens’ rights. Even
as the Constitution was being written, some political leaders insisted that a
bill of rights was needed to help develop citizens’ trust in the new government. However, they agreed to wait to make amendments to the Constitution until after it was ratified. As a result of this compromise, the first
ten amendments to the U.S. Constitution, passed in 1791, became the Bill of
Rights. These rights are well known to many Americans. The First
Amendment, for example, guarantees freedom of religion, freedom of speech,
and freedom of the press. The Sixth and Seventh Amendments guarantee
citizens’ rights to trial by jury.
As Americans’ ideas about citizenship and government have evolved, the

amendment process has allowed the Constitution to evolve as well. The
Thirteenth Amendment (1865) outlawed slavery; the Fifteenth Amendment
(1870) established that the rights of citizens “shall not be denied or abridged .
. . on account of race, color, or previous condition of servitude.”
A number of constitutional amendments have extended voting rights to
citizens. The Nineteenth Amendment (1920) gave women the right to vote.
The Twenty-fourth Amendment (1964) banned poll taxes, which some states
were using to prevent African Americans from voting. The Twenty-sixth
Amendment (1971) lowered the voting age to 18.

Practice 2
1. Based on the information on page 454, which of the following is the main
characteristic of a republic?
A. voting rights extended to few adult citizens
B. elected representatives exercising government power on behalf of
citizens
C. people governing themselves by voting directly on all issues
D. power concentrated among a small group
2. The Constitution is a relatively brief document containing only about
seven thousand words. It establishes the structure and powers of the U.S.
government but does not give many specifics.
What assumption were the drafters of the Constitution working under as
they kept the document general and brief?
A. There was not enough time to draft a long, detailed document before
the states had to ratify it.
B. Most of the power of the federal government would be reserved to the
president, who could govern as he saw fit.
C. The details of government would be worked out in the future, as the
need arose, within the framework of the Constitution.
D. Written constitutions were an untested basis for democratic

government, so it was better to keep such a document brief.
3. Franklin Delano Roosevelt was elected to the presidency four times
between 1933 and 1945. In reaction to this, the Twenty-second
Amendment, ratified in 1951, allowed presidents a maximum of two terms
in office.
People who favored presidential term limits would most likely have valued
which of the following?
A. responsibility but no authority
B. authority but no responsibility
C. the power of an office, not an individual
D. the power of an individual, not an office
4. The third paragraph of the passage on page 454 includes a summary of
Article 6 of the Constitution, also called the supremacy clause.
________________ is an example of the supremacy clause in action.
Congress voting to appropriate $2 billion for a federal highways
program
The Environmental Protection Agency issuing new regulations on a
pollutant
The U.S. Supreme Court refusing to hear a case
The U.S. Supreme Court declaring an Illinois state law unconstitutional
Question 5 refers to the following chart.
Methods of Amending the Constitution
Proposal

Ratification Method

When Used

Two-thirds vote
in both houses
of Congress to
propose an
amendment

By three-quarters of the
state legislatures

For every amendment
except one

By special conventions
in three-fourths of the
states

Twenty-first
Amendment (repealing
Prohibition)

Two-thirds of states
request Congress to
call a constitutional
convention to
consider an
amendment

By three-quarters of the
state legislatures

Never used

By special conventions
in three-fourths of the
states

Never used

5. Which of the following would best explain why the third and fourth
methods of amending the Constitution have never been used?
A. State governments do not usually act together.
B. Only Congress can propose amendments.
C. State legislatures can vote on an amendment.
D. Conventions meet more frequently than Congress and state legislatures
do.
Answers and explanations start on page 169.

Lesson 3: Levels and Branches of
Government
Key Ideas
Under our Constitution, the federal government must share power
with the states.
The federal government has three major branches—executive,
legislative, and judicial.
The three branches of the government balance each other’s power.

The U.S. government works in layers with different responsibilities at the
national, or federal, level; the state level; and local levels, including cities,
villages, and counties. The federal government works across all 50 states, and

its decisions and actions affect everyone. States have their own constitutions,
similar to the U.S. Constitution. State governments also are quite powerful in
shaping the lives of people in their states.
Federalism, which is a basic principle of the U.S. Constitution, means that
power is shared between the national and state levels of government.
Dividing power between federal and state government protects the rights of
individual states, but also allows our national government to enforce certain
rights of citizenship. The Constitution gives some powers only to the national
government, some only to state government, and some to both. For example,
only the federal government can declare war. States are given the power to
establish schools. Both federal and state governments can levy taxes and set
up court systems.
There are three branches of government at the federal level, each with different roles to play. The powers of each branch are described in the
Constitution. The executive branch consists of the president and various
advisors (including the president’s cabinet) and government departments,
such as the State Department. The executive branch enforces the nation’s
laws and provides national leadership, setting goals and policies. The
legislative branch consists of two houses of Congress: the Senate and the
House of Representatives. Congress is responsible for making laws that all
citizens, organizations, and businesses must follow. The judicial branch,
made up of the federal court system including the Supreme Court, decides
disputes related to laws, including the U.S. Constitution.

ON THE GED® TEST
Editorial cartoons like the one on page 457 use pictures and
humor to make a political point.
U.S. citizens vote for the president and all members of Congress. As a result,
these politicians have a responsibility to represent and serve their
constituents—the people who elected them. The president may be elected to
only two terms of four years each. Representatives are elected for two years

and Senators for six years; these members of Congress may be reelected for
any number of terms.
Federal judges, in contrast, are appointed by the president and confirmed by
the Senate. They can serve in these positions for life. As citizens, we have a
right to expect our federal judges to make impartial decisions based on the
Constitution and the laws of the United States.
The people who wrote the U.S. Constitution were afraid to give any
government body too much power. Therefore, the Constitution limits the
power of each branch of the federal government. Each branch has separate
powers. Each branch also has the power to act in ways that affect the other
branches, in a system called checks and balances. For example, the
president can veto laws made by Congress. Congress can override a
presidential veto by repassing the law with a two-thirds majority. The
Constitution is also now interpreted to mean that judges can review laws and
declare them unconstitutional.

Practice 3
Questions 1 through 4 are based on the information on page 456.
1. What is the key characteristic of federalism?
A. division of power between national and state governments
B. concentration of power in one government
C. concentration of power at the local level
D. a judicial system with trial, appellate, and supreme courts
2. Which of the following is an example of a government entity that is part of
the executive branch?
A. the Democratic National Committee
B. Congress’s House Rules Committee
C. the U.S. Court of Appeals
D. the State Department

3. Why do lifetime appointments help ensure that federal judges rule
impartially on legal issues?
A. Federal judges need not worry about pleasing their constituents in
order to be reelected.
B. Only people who demonstrate loyalty to the ruling political party are
appointed.
C. Lifetime appointments mean that federal judges acquire a great deal of
experience.
D. A federal judge must be impartial or he or she will not be reelected.
4. Match each of the following definitions to the matching term.
Terms
Checks and Balances
Veto
Senators
Constituents
Representatives
Definitions
Limits that one branch of government can place on the other branches
The people whom political leaders represent
The president’s power to strike down a law
Legislators who serve two-year terms
Legislators who serve six-year terms
Question 5 refers to the following cartoon.

5. Which of the following people is most likely depicted in the cartoon?
A. the president
B. a member of Congress
C. the head of a government department
D. a federal judge
Answers and explanations start on page 691.

Lesson 4: The Electoral System
Key Ideas
U.S. politics are dominated by the Democratic and Republican
parties.
Political parties hold primaries to select candidates for the general

election.
Political campaigns are very expensive, and many people believe that
we must reform our campaign finance laws.

At the national level in particular, two political parties dominate the political
arena in the United States: the Democrats and the Republicans. These
parties represent different ideas about the role of government in our nation. In
each election season, the parties and candidates work to promote their views,
or platforms—their positions on issues like tax reform, Social Security,
education spending, environmental protection, and so on.
The political parties have developed large organizations for raising money
and getting their candidates elected. Each party runs its own primary
election, in which candidates within the party compete with each other for the
party’s nomination. After the primary elections, the winners from each
party’s primary face off in the general election. In presidential elections, the
primary season ends with a party convention, where delegates from each
state gather to select the party’s candidate. Citizens vote in a general election,
and the results are tallied by state. Following the general election, electors
from each state cast their state’s votes in the Electoral College. The electors
generally must cast their votes for the candidate who won the general election
in their state. The candidate who wins the greatest number of electoral votes
becomes president.
Although Democrats and Republicans are by far the largest political parties,
there are small parties as well. At times, a “third-party candidate” like Ralph
Nader or Ross Perot attracts enough support to influence the outcome of the
national election. Even when small parties offer interesting new ideas or
solutions to problems, they have great difficulty attracting money and public
attention because the Democratic and Republican parties are so well
established.

GED® TEST TIP

When you are asked a question about a circle graph, remember
that it represents a whole, or 100%.
Although many voters consider themselves to be either Republicans or
Democrats, many others are independent. Candidates and their political
parties rely heavily on opinion polls to find out what voters think; they try to
tailor their campaign messages to appeal to large numbers of voters. Groups
of voters who might “swing” an election one way or another are particularly
important targets for political campaigns. Sometimes opposing candidates
participate in public debates.
Political campaigns can be very expensive, and the higher the office, the
more expensive the campaign. To reach the public, candidates pay for mailings, TV ads, and events, including personal appearances; they need campaign staff and offices; they must pay for travel expenses. As a result,
fundraising has become a very important part of running for office.
In recent decades, Americans have become more and more concerned about
the high cost of running for office. Many Americans believe that a candidate
should not have to be wealthy to begin with, or be overly obligated to
contributors, in order to gain political office. We now have laws that restrict
the size of campaign contributions. We also have restrictions on how
Political Action Committees (PACs) operate. However, many people
believe that more reforms are needed.

Practice 4
Questions 1 through 3 are based on the information on page 458.
1. Which of the following is necessary for a candidate to win the presidency?
A. earning a majority of primary wins
B. receiving a majority of the popular vote
C. receiving a majority in the Electoral College
D. having no third-party opponent

2. An exit poll is one that surveys people as they leave a voting location.
Instead of waiting for votes to be counted, the media often announce the
winners of elections based on exit polls.
Which of the following is an important drawback of using exit polls?
A. Exit polls may be inaccurate if the people polled are not representative
of the political unit as a whole or if the election is very close.
B. Exit polls allow the media to present election results during prime time
on election night instead of waiting until later in the evening.
C. Exit polls have undue influence on the way politicians running for
office conduct their campaigns.
D. Exit polls are likely to be unreliable when there is a wide margin
between the candidates.
3. Which of the following is an example of a primary election?
A. A Democrat and a Republican oppose one another in a race for the
U.S. Senate.
B. A Republican and an independent candidate oppose one another in a
race for the state senate.
C. Once presidential candidates are chosen, they select their running
mates.
D. Two city council members are on a ballot to determine which one will
run for mayor as a Democrat.
Questions 4 and 5 refer to the following graphs.

4. How do the campaign funding sources of Senate and House candidates
compare?
A. Individual donations provided a larger percentage of funds raised by
House candidates than of those raised by Senate candidates.
B. In total, individuals contributed a greater dollar amount to House
candidates than they did to Senate candidates.
C. Political parties provided a greater percentage of the funds raised by
Senate candidates than they did of funds raised by House candidates.
D. On average, Senate candidates received a greater percentage of their
funds from PACs than did House candidates.
5. Which of the following statements is supported by the graphs?
A. In 2010, self-funding was a larger source of funds for Senate
candidates than it was for House candidates.
B. In 2010, individual donations were the largest source of funds for
Senate candidates but not for House candidates.
C. In 2010, PACs were the largest source of funds for House candidates
but not for Senate candidates.
D. Fundraising accounts for most of the work on a congressional
campaign.
Answers and explanations start on page 692.

Lesson 5: The Role of the Citizen
Key Ideas
U.S. citizens have the right to vote and to hold public office, as well
as to enjoy many freedoms.
Citizens are responsible for contributing to the general welfare of the
nation.
In our court system, citizens serve on juries in order to protect the
rights of other citizens.

Citizenship is a special relationship between a person and a nation: the
nation owes the person certain rights and guarantees; the person has certain
obligations to the nation. Thus citizens of the United States have both rights
and responsibilities.
People born in the United States, no matter what the circumstances,
automatically become U.S. citizens. Regardless of where you were born, if
one of your parents was a U.S. citizen, then you are also a U.S. citizen.
People who immigrate to the United States from other countries can become
U.S. citizens through a legal process called naturalization; underage
children are naturalized along with their parents.
Our rights of citizenship are established in the first ten amendments to the
U.S. Constitution—the Bill of Rights (see page 454)—and in other sections
of the Constitution. One of the most fundamental rights of U.S. citizens is our
right to participate in our nation’s political life. We are eligible to vote and to
hold public office, and we elect representatives to govern us. In a famous
phrase in the Gettysburg Address, Abraham Lincoln said that we have a
government “of the people, by the people, and for the people.”
As Lincoln’s famous remark implies, a government “by the people” requires
that citizens take responsibility. First and foremost, we must uphold the laws
of our country. As citizens, we also make contributions to the national
welfare. Our taxes pay for services that the government provides to benefit -

everyone. By voting, we not only choose our government representatives, but
we also help to make the political process meaningful for everyone. Through
national service—such as military service, holding public office, or
participating in intensive volunteer programs like Teach for America—
citizens may devote years of their lives to the responsibilities of citizenship.

ON THE GED® TEST
The GED® Social Studies Test will include questions about
“practical documents,” which may include voter registration
or election information.
Our jury system is an important example of the give-and-take of citizenship.
Each of us is guaranteed the right to a fair and speedy trial, heard by “a jury
of peers,” if we are accused of a crime. However, we are also obligated to
serve on juries or as witnesses when we are called by the court system. The
fairness of our legal system depends on citizens participating in that system.
Therefore, our employers are obligated to release us from work at the request
of the courts.
In addition to the rights and responsibilities established by law, many citizens
contribute their time and money in other ways that serve society as a whole.
People volunteer to serve organizations in their communities or within their
professions—serving meals in shelters, fundraising for schools, offering free
medical services, etc. People also give money to causes they think are
important, from political campaigns to food pantries to environmental
organizations. Many citizens also work hard to conduct their daily lives in
ways that contribute to the general welfare: by recycling, cleaning up trash,
and looking out for their neighbors and family members.

Practice 5
Question 1 is based on the information on page 460.

1. _______________ outlines the rights of U.S. citizens.
The Declaration of Independence
The U.S. Constitution
A U.S. passport
A person’s naturalization papers
Questions 2 and 3 refer to the following information.
Noncitizens can be classified into five groups:
Resident alien: A foreigner who has established permanent residence in the
United States.
Nonresident alien: A foreigner who is staying in the United States for a
brief, specified period.
Enemy alien: A foreigner who is a citizen of a nation at war with the United
States.
Refugee: A foreigner fleeing his or her country to escape persecution or
danger.
Illegal alien: A foreigner who comes to the United States without legal
documentation.
2. Louvina married an American and moved to the United States from
Trinidad in 2010. Three years later, she filed a legal petition requesting
U.S. citizenship. In what category of alien does Louvina belong?
A. resident alien
B. nonresident alien
C. enemy alien
D. refugee
3. What would happen to the legal status of noncitizens living in the United
States if their country declares war on the United States?
A. They would become nonresident aliens.
B. They would become resident aliens.

C. They would become enemy aliens.
D. They would become refugees.
4. The United States must balance the right of society to protect itself against
the rights of an accused criminal. One aspect of this tension is the Fourth
Amendment guarantee of “the right of people to be secure in their persons,
houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures.”
Which of the following values is supported by the Fourth Amendment?
A. free speech
B. privacy
C. civic duty
D. volunteerism
Question 5 refers to the following graph.

5. Which of the following is a conclusion based on the graph rather than a
detail of the graph?
A. About 63 percent of people aged 45 to 64 reported voting in the 2012

presidential election.
B. Those aged 65+ reported the highest voter turnout in the 2012
presidential election, at 70 percent.
C. If the 2012 presidential election is representative of elections generally
in the United States, voter turnout increases with age.
D. Only about 38 percent of young people reported voting in the 2012
presidential election.
Answers and explanations start on page 692.

Civics and Government Practice Questions
Question 1 refers to the following chart.
Political Divisions in the 113th Congress, 2013
Party

House

Senate

Republicans

234

45

Democrats

201

53

Others

—

2 (In case of a tie, Vice
President Joe Biden (D) would
vote.)

Vacant

—

—

1. Which of the following is the best summary of the chart above?
A. Congress is made up of the House and the Senate.
B. In 2013, a different major party controlled the House than controlled
the Senate.
C. In 2013, the narrow margin of control in each body of Congress made
it difficult to pass legislation.
D. In 2013, the vice president was likely to cast the deciding vote on

many bills before the Senate.
2. In 1215, English nobles limited royal power by forcing King John to
accept the Magna Carta. This document gave certain rights to nobles, such
as protection of private property, trial by jury, and religious freedoms.
Therefore, the
Carta.

shares essential characteristics with the Magna

Mayflower Compact, which established a government for Plymouth
colony,
Bill of Rights of the U.S. Constitution, which guarantees citizens certain
rights,
Albany Plan of Union, which called for a colonial confederation,
Federalist Papers, which encouraged ratification of the U.S.
Constitution,
Questions 3 and 4 refer to the following passage.
In 1979, Congress passed legislation to allow political parties to raise
unlimited amounts of general-purpose money not designated for particular
candidates. In 1991, a lawsuit forced disclosure of such “soft money”
contributions, and concern grew about the size of individual donations, the
extent of total donations, and the ways in which the money was being spent.
During the presidential elections of 1996 and 2000, campaign fundraising,
especially the raising and spending of soft money, was an issue, with the
candidates promising reform. Finally, in 2001, after several years of hearings,
the Senate passed the McCain-Feingold bill, which would eliminate the
unregulated soft money contributions that make up a large proportion of the
parties’ budgets.
3. Which of the following is an example of a soft money contribution?
A. a $250 ticket to a fundraising dinner-dance to benefit a mayoral
candidate
B. a $3,000 donation to the campaign fund of an incumbent senator
C. a $3,000 contribution to a party fund for TV ads on political issues
D. a $1,000 gift to a senator’s campaign fund in response to a direct mail

solicitation
4. Which of the following is the most likely reason soft money was not a
major issue in the 1980s?
A. People were less aware of soft money because disclosure was not
required at that time.
B. Political campaigns were publicly financed, so soft money was not
needed.
C. Most candidates spent part of their campaign funds on television ads.
D. McCain and Feingold had not submitted their campaign finance reform
bill.
Questions 5 and 6 refer to the following paragraph and graphs.
In order to win a presidential election, a candidate must win a majority of the
vote in the Electoral College. Each state has as many electors as it has
senators and representatives in Congress. In most states, the winner of the
popular vote gets all the electoral votes of the state. These graphs show the
popular and Electoral College votes in the election of 2012.

5. Which one of the following statements is supported by the information in
the paragraph and the graphs?

A. A presidential candidate will receive the same percentage of electoral
votes as he or she received of the popular vote.
B. Romney won a greater percentage of the electoral vote than of the
popular vote in 2012.
C. Jill Stein won a greater percentage of the popular vote than of the
electoral vote in 2012.
D. The total of popular votes cast for all candidates other than Barack
Obama was greater than the total of those cast for Barack Obama.
6. Which of the following would be the best title for the paragraph and the
graphs?
A. 2012 Presidential Election: How Obama Defeated Romney
B. 2012 Presidential Election: Third-Party Influence
C. 2012 Presidential Election: Winning the Electoral College
D. 2012 Presidential Election: Popular and Electoral Votes
Question 7 refers to the following passage.
Where do I vote? Your voting district is determined by your place of
residence. Watch your local newspaper for an announcement indicating
polling locations and times, or contact your local board of election to
determine your voting location.
You may also obtain your polling place location by accessing the website of
the Office of the Secretary of State at www.anystate.us. You may also call the
Office of the Secretary of State for assistance.
7. Which of the following is assumed but not stated outright in the voter
guide above?
A. The board of election is the county, city, or town office responsible for
local voting.
B. A voter’s polling place is determined by his or her address.
C. A voter can find his or her polling place on the Internet.
D. A voter can call the Office of the Secretary of State to find out where

to vote.
8. An interest group is an organization with specific goals that seeks to
influence government policies.
Place a ★ into the box next to each entity that constitutes an interest
group. There may be more than one.
The Democratic Party, which nominates candidates and
tries to win elections
The National Association of Manufacturers, which lobbies
for businesses
The Federal Communications Commission, which regulates
broadcasters
The Cabinet, an advisory body for the president
Public Citizen, a nonprofit consumer rights advocacy group
Questions 9 and 10 refer to the following cartoon.

9. What is the main idea of this cartoon?
A. Most voters are working people.
B. Most registered voters don’t vote.
C. Voters should establish another political party.
D. A non-voters’ party would lose every election.
10. Which of the following values is the cartoonist appealing for?
A. the work ethic
B. majority rule
C. civic duty
D. national pride
11. An oligarchy is a system of government in which a small group of people
holds power.

Which of the following is an oligarchy?
A. China, where the top leaders of the Communist party control the
government
B. Iraq, when it had a dictator, Saddam Hussein
C. Great Britain, with a monarch, a prime minister, and an elected
parliament
D. Greece, with a prime minister and an elected parliament
12. Three typical laws from the code of Hammurabi, written about 1700
B.C.E., are “If a son strike his father, his hands shall be hewn off. If a man
put out the eye of another man, his eye shall be put out. If he break
another man’s bone, his bone shall be broken.”
What principle underlies these laws?
A. retribution
B. rehabilitation
C. incarceration
D. mediation
Questions 13 and 14 refer to the following map and table.

13. How many states have the death penalty?
A. 12
B. 18
C. 32
D. 40
14. People who favor capital punishment usually argue that it prevents
serious crimes like homicide. Based on the map and chart, what is a
logical flaw with this argument?
A. A life sentence without parole costs taxpayers more than executing an
inmate.
B. Some executed inmates turn out to have been innocent based on newly
discovered evidence.

C. Two of the five states with the highest per capita homicide rates have
abolished the death penalty.
D. Two of the five states with the lowest per capita homicide rates have
abolished the death penalty.
15. The U.S. Constitution gives the president the power to make treaties with
foreign nations, and it gives the Senate the power to “advise and consent”
on all treaties. Thus a two-thirds majority of the Senate must ratify any
treaty presented by the president. In 1978, President Jimmy Carter
persuaded the Senate to ratify treaties with Panama that transferred control
of the Panama Canal from the United States to Panama. Many Americans
were outraged and believed that U.S. interests had been given away.
Which of the following is an opinion rather than a statement of fact?
A. Presidents have the power to enter into treaties with foreign nations.
B. A two-thirds majority of the Senate is needed to ratify a treaty.
C. The 1978 Panama treaties sold out U.S. interests to Panama.
D. The 1978 Panama treaties gave control of the Panama Canal to
Panama.
16. In the mayor-council form of city government, voters elect both a mayor
and a city council. The mayor is the city’s chief executive, operating the
city on a day-to-day basis and also serving a ceremonial function. The city
council is a legislative body, in charge of the city’s finances and passing
city laws. In the council-manager form of city government, voters elect a
city council that makes city policies and laws. The council may elect a
mayor who has a largely ceremonial function. It appoints a professionally
trained city manager to oversee day-to-day operations.
What is the main similarity between the mayor’s role in the mayor-council
and in the council-manager forms of city government?
A. The mayor sets policy.
B. The mayor runs day-to-day operations.
C. The mayor is elected by voters.
D. The mayor has ceremonial duties.

Answers and explanations start on page 693.

CHAPTER 4

Economics
Lesson 1: Basic Economics Concepts
Key Ideas
Businesses utilize capital, labor, and materials to create goods and
services to sell.
Markets are systems that bring sellers’ goods and services to buyers.
The prices of goods and services are determined in part by supply and
demand.

In economics, capital is a term for things that can produce income. Money
can be capital; so can equipment, land, and buildings. Businesses invest
capital in order to create goods and services to sell for profit. However,
capital by itself cannot create value. Labor, the work of human beings,
transforms capital and materials into goods and services that can be sold.
For example, a business that makes computers must make capital investments
to build a factory and install equipment for production. Then the business
must hire workers and managers to run the plant and use the equipment. The

business must also buy the materials and parts to build the computers. The
materials and parts are producer goods, while the finished computers, ready
to sell in stores, are consumer goods. Not all businesses make or build
objects. Some businesses create value by selling intangible services to their
customers—such as an employment agency that offers the service of
matching people with jobs.
Markets are established routines and networks for selling and buying goods
and services. There are producers’ markets for producer goods; there are
retail and wholesale markets for consumer goods; there are markets for raw
materials such as minerals; there are financial markets for selling stocks and
bonds. Some markets are more highly organized than others, and all markets
are regulated by law to some extent. But markets, by definition, are not
completely under the control of any government or agency.

ON THE GED® TEST
Use the direction of lines on line graphs to spot trends and
make predictions.
Goods and services are distributed through markets so that they can be
consumed where they are wanted. Through the market system, sellers and
buyers negotiate prices and contracts; they compete for the best terms
possible in that market. For example, a computer manufacturer might enter
the consumer electronics market, competing with other manufacturers to sell
its goods at a fair price to retailers. The retailers negotiate contracts
specifying how many computers they are willing to buy and distribute to
consumers through their stores or catalogs.
How are prices determined in the market system? In economics, price is
related to supply and demand. Sellers need to earn money on the goods they
have produced. Buyers want to spend as little as possible. When the supply of
something is large, buyers shop around looking for the best price, and sellers
lower their prices in order to move their inventory. On the other hand, if a
product is scarce, buyers are less able to shop around, and sellers can raise

their prices. When Florida has a hard freeze and fruit growers lose their citrus
crops, the price of oranges goes up. That is because there are fewer oranges
to buy and fewer sellers to buy them from, so those sellers can charge more.
Supply and demand most clearly influence price in a free market economy.
The U.S. economy operates primarily, but not completely, as a free market.
For example, governmental price supports ensure that farmers can sell
certain agricultural products at prices that allow them to earn a profit.

Practice 1
Questions 1 through 4 are based on the information on page 466.
1. What is the main role of labor in an economy?
A. to provide capital to start new businesses
B. to convert capital and raw materials into products and services
C. to purchase all the goods and services that are produced
D. to purchase raw materials in retail and wholesale markets
2. Which of the following is an example of a producer good rather than a
consumer good?
A. a pencil
B. a can opener
C. a cell phone
D. a plastic material
3. When there are very few houses for sale in an area, the real estate market
is said to be a seller’s market.
Why is this name appropriate?
A. When the supply of houses is low and demand is high, sellers can raise
their prices.
B. When the supply of houses is low and demand is high, sellers will
accept an offer lower than list price.

C. Sellers are always at an advantage in the real estate market.
D. Competition among sellers raises prices.
4. Why might the U.S. government offer price supports to farmers but not to
toy manufacturers?
A. Toy sales vary widely, depending on the appeal of a particular toy.
B. Toys are not critical to a nation’s economic and political well-being.
C. Toys are sold to adults for use by children.
D. Toys are distributed through conventional wholesale and retail
channels.
Questions 5 and 6 refer to the following graph.

5. When apples cost 30 cents each, how many apples does Keisha buy each
month?
A. 4
B. 8
C. 12
D. 16
6. Which of the following conclusions is supported by the data on the graph?
A. As the supply of apples rises, Keisha buys fewer apples.
B. As the supply of apples rises, the demand for apples falls.

C. As the price of apples rises, Keisha buys fewer apples.
D. As the price of apples falls, Keisha buys the same number of apples.
7. Place a ★ into the box corresponding to each service business in the list
below.
a tool manufacturer

a bicycle repair shop

a paper mill

a microchip factory

a car wash

a beauty salon

Answers and explanations start on page 693.

Lesson 2: The U.S. Economic System
Key Ideas
The U.S. economy is built on principles of laissez-faire capitalism.
The U.S. economy moves through cyclical phases of growth,
slowdown, recession, and recovery.
Saving and investing contribute to the economy by making money
available for businesses to grow.

In the United States, the economic activity of individual people and
businesses primarily determines our economic health and growth. We make
our own decisions about how to save and spend most of our income. We can
accept employment as we choose, become entrepreneurs and build
businesses of our own, and seek education and training to whatever level best
serves our goals. These freedoms are based on laissez-faire capitalism, the
ideas of 18th-century economist Adam Smith, who believed that if individuals are free to act in their own best interests economically, the sum total
of their actions will be in the best interests of the society as a whole.

Throughout the history of the United States, free enterprise and competition
have played important roles in the development of our economy. Businesses
have incentives to grow larger—either by expanding their capacity or by
integrating a broader set of functions into their operations—in order to make
more profit. However, businesses are expected to compete with each other
on the merits of their products and operations. Businesses are not allowed to
form monopolies—single companies that control whole industries—and they
also are not allowed to form oligopolies—tight-knit groups of companies that
control whole industries.

ON THE GED® TEST
A short reading passage may accompany a graphic, such as a
map. Some questions may require you to use information from
both the passage and the graphic.
Because the U.S. economy is not under government control, no one can
predict or control exactly how the economy will behave. Our economy tends
to move through a business cycle with identifiable phases, but the length and
strength of a cycle and its phases vary greatly. The first phase of a cycle is the
growth phase, in which businesses invest and expand optimistically. At some
point, growth is slowed or stopped by one or more factors—limited
resources, limited production capacity, tight employment, or market
saturation—and the economy enters a slowdown phase. As businesses lay
off workers, stop investing their capital, and cut back pro-duction, the
economy enters a recession or depression phase. Unemployment rises,
consumer spending slows down, and businesses act very conservatively,
holding down wages and prices, avoiding risks, and managing cash flow
tightly. Eventually, the economy moves into a recovery phase, perhaps
initiated by a government action. Recovery may be slow or uneven across
economic sectors, but eventually the economy moves into a new growth
phase. Inflation, in which the combined price of goods and services grows
faster than the purchasing power of the currency, is only partly related to
these business cycle phases.

Banking and investment services, like most U.S. industries, are conducted on
principles of free enterprise. A major role of banks and savings and loan
associations is to create pools of savings in order to make money available as
credit to businesses and consumers. Stock exchanges have a similar purpose;
they allow investors to purchase shares of stock, which represent part
ownership of a business. Both saving and investing make funds available for
businesses to use to grow. When people invest in stock, they take risks
because the value of the stock depends on the success of the business.
However, the potential return is generally much higher than the interest rate
on a savings account.

Practice 2
Questions 1 through 4 are based on the information on page 468.
1. Why are monopolies not permitted in the United States?
A. Monopolies are too efficient.
B. Monopolies are part of laissez-faire capitalism.
C. Monopolies result from free enterprise.
D. Monopolies shut out competition.
2. According to the passage,

is one characteristic of a recession.

increased job growth
large investments of capital
increased consumer spending
rising unemployment
3. Private ownership of property (land or buildings) is a key characteristic of
the free enterprise system. Owning property gives people a strong
incentive to take care of it and use it productively.
What is the basis for this incentive?
A. Property owners have a stake in the future value of the property.
B. Property owners work harder than tenants do.

C. Property owners are given tax incentives by the federal government.
D. Property owners must pay real estate taxes to local government.
4. Which of the following investments carries the most risk?
A. opening a savings account at a local bank
B. buying a certificate of deposit at a savings and loan institution
C. buying stock in a new company, such as an Internet startup
D. buying stock in an established company, such as Microsoft
Question 5 refers to the following paragraph and graph.
At different times during the business cycle, the gross domestic product—the
total value of goods and services produced in a year—rises and falls.

5. Which of the following conclusions is supported by the paragraph and the
graph?
A. High points in the business cycle are generally followed by recoveries.
B. Low points in the business cycle are generally followed by slowdowns.
C. During recessions, the rate of unemployment drops.
D. Despite ups and downs, the gross domestic product generally increases
over time.
6. Based on the passage on page 468, what do saving and investing in stocks
have in common?

A. They provide capital for businesses to grow.
B. They provide a sure rate of return.
C. They pay a fixed rate of interest.
D. They are without risk.
Answers and explanations start on page 694.

Lesson 3: The Economy and the U.S.
Government
Key Ideas
The U.S. government plays a major part in the nation’s economy.
The federal government facilitates the free market system while
protecting workers and consumers.
The free market system cannot effectively provide for all our needs,
so government fills some gaps.

Although the United States has primarily a free market economy, the U.S.
government does have important economic functions. Both the executive and
the legislative branches of government are involved in setting the U.S.
government budget. The government has considerable impact on our
economy, since it determines our taxes, employs many people, and borrows
and spends much money. The federal budget may have a surplus of revenue,
in which case elected leaders may either spend the additional funds or cut
taxes; or the budget may have a revenue deficit, requiring the government to
borrow money to cover its expenses. Government spending sometimes has a
very direct impact on the economy. For example, if the government wants to
boost the national economy out of a recession, it may spend extra money on
projects that create new jobs.
The federal government is also responsible for maintaining good conditions

for our free market system. The government must have laws and courts in
place to maintain property rights. It must enforce fair legal standards for
operating a business. The federal government provides a stable currency and
operates the U.S. Mint, which makes coins and prints paper money. Our
central banking system, the Federal Reserve System, manages the total
amount of money available for lending and borrowing in the pri-vate banking
system and partially controls interest rates. The Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation (FDIC) insures the money in individual bank accounts in case
of bank fraud or failure.

ON THE GED® TEST
Charts, such as the one on page 471, are used to summarize
information. You may be asked to find specific information
from the chart or to apply information from the chart to a
specific situation.
One of the fundamental purposes of the federal government is to promote the
general welfare of the nation. Therefore, the government takes over many
functions that the free market system does not provide. For example, the free
market does not distribute wealth according to what people need to live on,
so the government collects taxes to redistribute some money to people who
don’t earn enough. The government also provides infrastructure, such as
interstate highways, that indirectly supports economic activity.
Another role for government in the economy is protecting workers from
health dangers and exploitation. The Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA) is a special federal agency charged to protect
workers on the job, particularly in hazardous industries. Many federal and
state laws also protect the interests of workers. For example, all states
regulate the hours and types of work that children may perform. A number of
agencies are involved in enforcing safe and fair working conditions; they visit
businesses, investigate reports of problems, identify violations, and initiate
prosecution in some cases.

Another group of agencies protects consumers from fraudulent business
practices and unsafe products. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
is responsible for making sure that food products are safe, drugs are effective,
and cosmetics and drugs are labeled properly. The Federal Trade
Commission (FTC) ensures that product claims in advertising and on
package labels are true and complete.

Practice 3
Questions 1 through 3 are based on the passage on page 470.
1. When the U.S. government
government has a budget surplus.

, it is an indication that the

issues bonds through the U.S. Treasury
attempts to boost the economy by cutting the discount rate
registers expenditures that exceed its revenues
registers revenues that exceed its expenditures
2. Which of the following legislative actions would lead to a direct increase
in consumer spending?
A. raising Social Security contributions
B. decreasing spending on federal work projects
C. cutting the federal income tax
D. ratifying an international trade agreement
3. Which of the following is an example of infrastructure that supports
economic activity?
A. consumer demand
B. the annual federal budget
C. local sales taxes
D. the air traffic control system
4. The federal government has two main ways to manipulate the economy.

The first is fiscal policy, in which the government increases or decreases
taxes and spending to influence the economy. The second is monetary
policy, in which the government increases or decreases the supply of
money in order to stimulate or slow the economy.
What is the main similarity between fiscal and monetary policy?
A. Both involve raising taxes.
B. Both involve lowering taxes.
C. Both are budgetary tools of state governments.
D. Both affect the amount of money circulating in the economy.
Questions 5 and 6 refer to the following paragraph and chart.
Monetary policy affects the amount of money in circulation. When there is
rapid economic growth and a risk of inflation, the Federal Reserve System
(the “Fed”) slows it down by tightening the money supply. This makes it
more difficult for people and businesses to borrow and spend money. When
the economy is sluggish, the Fed increases the money supply to stimulate
borrowing and spending.

5. Place a dot in the circle in each box that indicates a step the government
might take in order to stimulate the economy.
6. Since the Fed’s monetary policy options have such specific effects, why

does the Fed sometimes fail to head off recession or stimulate recovery?
A. The Fed’s board meets only four times a year.
B. The people on the Fed’s board lack experience.
C. Our complex economy takes time to respond.
D. Our economy can be controlled only by international economic forces.
Answers and explanations start on page 694.

Lesson 4: Labor and Consumer Issues
Key Ideas
Workers earn wages and some benefits and protections in exchange
for their labor.
The U.S. economy is now in a time of rapid change, and workers
must prepare themselves to adapt.
Consumers must protect themselves by being aware of risks and by
spending their money wisely.

As workers, we earn wages and other benefits in exchange for our labor.
People who are paid hourly wages are paid only for the number of hours they
work. Their earnings may fluctuate depending on how much their labor is
needed. People who earn salaries typically receive the same constant pay all
the time, although the hours they work may fluctuate. Some people are paid
for “piecework”—that is, for each piece of work they complete. Many
workers receive benefits in addition to their wages, such as health insurance,
vacation pay, and special savings plans. A worker’s total compensation for a
job is the combined value of wages and benefits.
Workers and their employers must pay taxes and buy insurance to cover
work-related problems, including injury, disability, and unemployment.
Workers who lose their jobs because they are fired or laid off usually can

receive unemployment benefits for a time or until they find new jobs.
Sometimes workers lose their jobs because of major economic changes. For
example, rapid changes in the steel industry drove out much of the steel
manufacturing in the United States. Plants closed, and workers who thought
they would spend their lives making good wages in steel mills suddenly
found their skills worthless. In most cases, these workers had to learn new
skills. This kind of rapid change is common in our modern times. Because so
many markets are international, and because transportation, communication,
and shipping are possible even over very long distances, businesses can
change strategies very quickly and change their workforce as a result.
Workers need to anticipate changes in their industries and continually seek
new training in order to be prepared for change.

ON THE GED® TEST
Some of the economics questions on the test will be based on everyday topics faced by workers and consumers.
Most workers have direct individual agreements with their employers.
However, labor unions are common in certain industries and professions.
Through collective bargaining, unions negotiate contracts for wages and
working conditions on behalf of all union members. If these negotiations fail,
the union can call a strike, in which workers refuse to work. When labormanagement negotiations break down, federal mediators may be asked to
intervene. The National Labor Relations Board helps companies and unions
resolve disputes.
We all participate in the U.S. economy as consumers. The free market
system offers U.S. consumers an amazing array of choices for the goods and
services we want. As retailers and marketers woo our business relentlessly,
we should all remember the maxim, “Let the buyer beware.” Although
government agencies must protect consumers, consumers must also protect
themselves. For example, federal laws require that potentially hazardous
products have special labeling and instructions. But these will not protect us
as consumers unless we read them. Parents are required by law to strap their

small children into automobile safety seats. But if the seats are incorrectly
installed, the children are still at risk. Retailers who offer credit payment
plans are required to disclose the interest rate, payment amount, and number
of payments, but it’s up to consumers to work out the total expense and
compare the total with the purchase price of the item.

Practice 4
Questions 1 through 4 are based on the information on page 472.
1. What is a worker’s total compensation?
A. wages only
B. benefits only
C. wages and benefits
D. the amount received in unemployment benefits
2. Reread the second paragraph on page 472. Which of the following
statements is a conclusion rather than a supporting detail related to the
paragraph?
A. Workers must learn skills throughout their lives to be prepared for
changes in their industries.
B. Most steel manufacturing moved out of the United States.
C. Many steelworkers had to retrain themselves and learn new skills.
D. Workers sometimes lose their jobs because of major economic
restructuring.
3. A

is acting as a consumer.
person working in a shopping mall
professor teaching economics at a community college
woman buying a computer
teen starting a babysitting cooperative

4. Which of the following proverbs or slogans expresses the principle that

underlies labor unions?
A. All for one and one for all.
B. Strike while the iron is hot.
C. Work expands to fill the time available.
D. Many hands make light work.
Questions 5 and 6 refer to the following graph.

5. When was civilian unemployment at its lowest during the decade shown
on the graph?
A. in 2000
B. in 2002
C. in 2006
D. in 2008
6. Which of the following statements is supported by the data in the graph?
A. People who have stopped looking for work are not counted among the
unemployed.
B. As the number of employed civilians rose steadily from 2003 to 2006,
the number of unemployed slowly declined.
C. The rate of civilian unemployment during the 2000s exceeded the rate
of civilian employment.
D. Unemployed civilians made up about 25 percent of the total civilian
workforce from 2000 to 2010.

Answers and explanations start on page 694.

Economics Practice Questions
Questions 1 through 3 refer to the following passage.
In order to produce goods and services, a free market economy must have
four factors of production: (1) land, including natural resources; (2) capital,
including money, factories, and machinery; (3) labor, the people who produce
goods and services; and (4) entrepreneurs, business people who take risks to
organize the other factors of production into businesses that will produce a
profit.
1. Which of the following best defines the factors of production?
A. the political organizations that support an economy
B. the various types of resources needed for an economy to produce goods
and services
C. the way in which the work flow is organized in a factory or office
D. all the transactions involved in producing goods and services
2. In a communist economy, a central government makes all of the economic
decisions.
Which factor of production is not part of a communist economy?
A. land
B. natural resources
C. labor
D. entrepreneurs
3. Which of the following is an example of capital?
A. an office building
B. a deposit of iron ore
C. a skilled engineer

D. the founder of a publishing business
4. Many fiscal conservatives believe that the U.S. budget should be balanced,
with spending equal to income. They think it is wrong for the government
to influence the economy by manipulating taxes or by borrowing. Instead,
they feel that a balanced budget reassures business leaders that the
economy is solid.
Which of the following statements is a fact?
A. In a balanced budget, revenues equal expenditures.
B. The government should not use the budget to tinker with the economy.
C. The government should not borrow money to balance the budget.
D. A balanced government budget is the best indicator that the economy
is healthy.
Question 5 refers to the following graph.

5. Which of the following statements is supported by the data on the graph?
A. More than half of all personal income was earned through work in
February 2013.
B. Government social benefits accounted for more than one-quarter of
personal income in February 2013.
C. Interest and dividends accounted for one-third of personal income in
February 2013.
D. Per capita income was roughly $8,565 in February 2013.

Questions 6 and 7 refer to the following cartoon.

6. Who does the man in the plaid shorts represent?
A. a retiree
B. an American taxpayer
C. a corporate executive
D. an investor
7. Why is the man in the plaid shorts calm about his ride on the roller
coaster?
A. He enjoys riding on roller coasters.
B. He has made money buying bonds.
C. He is accustomed to stock market ups and downs.
D. All of his retirement savings are in stocks.
8. Employers withhold, or take out, federal income tax from their employees’

paychecks. However, some people need to make estimated tax payments.
According to the Internal Revenue Service, “Estimated tax is the method
used to pay tax on income that is not subject to withholding (for example,
earnings from self-employment, interest, dividends, rents, alimony, etc.”
A

is most likely to need to make estimated tax payments.
factory worker
student working part-time at the university
person who runs a home day-care center
gas station attendant

9. In a free market economy, people make their own decisions about
working, buying goods and property, and starting businesses. Which of
the following is most likely to be highly valued in nations with free
market economies?
A. cooperation
B. individualism
C. job security
D. economic equality
Questions 10 and 11 refer to the following graph.

10. At the bottom of the chart, select the year between 2008 and 2012 in
which the United States ran its largest budget deficit.

11. If a family wanted to make a graph of its economic situation similar to
this graph of U.S. revenues and expenditures, what set of documents for
the years 2008 to 2012 would be most useful?
A. records showing all family members’ sources of income
B. income tax returns and expense records
C. credit card bills and rent or mortgage statements
D. records showing the value of the family’s possessions
12. The Interstate Highway System, begun in 1956, consists of more than
45,000 miles of four- to eight-lane highways connecting most large U.S.
cities. The federal government pays for almost 90 percent of the building
and maintenance of interstate highways out of receipts from excise taxes
on gasoline, tires, truck parts, and other related products.
Which of the following best summarizes this information?
A. In 1956, the federal government established the Interstate Highway
System.
B. The Interstate Highway System consists of thousands of miles of large
highways.
C. The federal government collects excise taxes on transportation-related
items.
D. The national network of interstate highways is paid for mostly by
federal excise taxes.
13. In recent years, the United States has lowered protective tariffs (charges
on goods imported from other countries), arguing that lower tariffs
encourage free trade and benefit consumers by decreasing the cost of
imported goods.
From the perspective of a U.S. factory worker, what is the flaw in this
argument?
A. When cheaper imported goods force out U.S.-made goods, U.S.
factory workers often lose their jobs.
B. Free trade leads to cheaper imported goods because the cost of labor is
less in many other nations.

C. Factory workers cannot afford to buy imported consumer goods even if
they are cheaper than U.S.-made goods.
D. Lower protective tariffs actually raise the prices of all goods whether
they are made in the United States or in foreign countries.
Question 14 refers to the following chart.

14. In the table above, place a dot or dots in the circle(s) next to the agency
or agencies that could be involved in a dispute over a commercial that
implied something about a product that was not true.
15. Equilibrium occurs when the supply of a product or service equals the
demand for it. A product tends to be priced at the equilibrium point. When
the price is greater than the equilibrium point, demand decreases and there
is an oversupply of the product on the market.
is the result of the price falling below the equilibrium point.
A shortage of the product
A surplus of the product
The equilibrium point decreasing
The equilibrium point increasing

16. One approach to the study of economics is called macroeconomics.
Macroeconomics deals with economies as a whole. For instance, a
macroeconomist might study the causes of inflation or the factors that
determine why some national economies grow quickly and others do not.
Which of the following is most likely to be studied by a macroeconomist?
A. how a firm prices its products or services
B. what causes high rates of unemployment
C. what determines consumer demand for a product
D. how a factory makes production decisions
Question 17 refers to the following graph.

17. Which of the following conclusions is supported by the data on the
graph?
A. As the price per eraser decreases, manufacturers supply more erasers.
B. As the price per eraser increases, manufacturers supply fewer erasers.
C. As the price per eraser increases, manufacturers supply more erasers.
D. As the supply of erasers increases, the demand for erasers decreases.
Answers and explanations start on page 695.

CHAPTER 5

Geography and the World
Lesson 1: Early Civilizations
Key Ideas
Ancient civilizations developed where people could settle in one
place with a secure food supply.
The ancient civilizations of Greece and Rome were incubators for
important ideas in modern government.
Ancient civilizations also left legacies in art, architecture, science,
and astronomy.

One of the earliest known civilizations is ancient Egypt. By 5000 B.C.E., people who lived along the Nile River had begun to take advantage of the
fertile soil left behind by floods. The river and irrigation systems allowed the
Egyptians to grow enough food to support a large population. Around 3000
B.C.E., Egyptian civilization grew under the rule of Egypt’s kings, or
pharaohs. Believing their pharaohs to be part god, Egyptians built the
famous pyramids to house these rulers in their next lives. Many who built
the pyramids and did the hard work to build this civilization were slaves.

Around the same time, in the Fertile Crescent—an area northeast of Egypt
—Sumerian city-states were also developing irrigation and flood control
methods. They also created a system of writing. In about 1800 b.c.e., the
Sumerians were conquered by the Babylonians. One of the Babylonian kings,
Hammurabi, is remembered for codifying laws. The Code of Hammurabi
was written on a huge stone in a public place so all Babylonians could know
and follow the law.
The civilization of ancient Greece did not develop around a river, but around
the sea. Classical Greece was not politically unified. As its city-states fought
for control of each other’s land, Sparta, a particularly warlike state, took over
a number of other city-states. Athens, another city-state, is known as the first
political democracy. All Athenian citizens could vote—but less than half of
Athenians were citizens. Women could not vote, nor could the many slaves.
Classical Greek civilization lasted only a few hundred years, but its original
ideas, such as democracy, and its stunning arts, including architecture and
literature, remain influential even today.

ON THE GED® TEST
The world history questions require that you have familiarity
with major topics in world history. You do not need to
memorize names or dates.
Greece was eventually conquered, first by Philip II of Macedon, and later by
the Romans. Rome began as a city on the Italian Peninsula, governed by its
wealthy citizens through an elected Senate. Roman citizens were governed by
a system of laws that is still influential in the United States. For example, the
Romans believed that a person accused of a crime was innocent until proven
guilty. The power of Rome grew, and the Romans took over many lands
surrounding the Mediterranean Sea, pushing north as far as England and east
into Asia by about 100 C.E. Roman leaders built systems and infrastructure to
make their empire strong: schools, roads and bridges, hospitals, a tax system,
and an army. The ancient Roman Empire lasted until 476 C.E.

Ancient Egypt, Greece, and Rome were only a few of the early civilizations
in which people made important scientific discoveries and developed
enduring ideas. In Central America, the Maya, whose culture was strongest
from 300 to 900 C.E., invented a pictographic writing system in which they
recorded remarkable discoveries in mathematics and astronomy. The Inca
Empire in South America had a sophisticated system of government. The
Incas built amazing roads and bridges in their rugged mountain lands. In
Mexico, the Aztecs invented a written language and a calendar system and
expanded their farmlands by dredging mud from lakes.

Practice 1
Questions 1 through 4 are based on the information on page 478.
1. Which of the following Central American civilizations is particularly
noted for achievements in both mathematics and astronomy?
A. the Sumerians
B. the Maya
C. the Aztecs
D. the Incas
2. According to the information on page 478, two ancient civilizations were
particularly influential on the form of government adopted by the United
States of America. Select the two civilizations that had the greatest impact
on America’s systems of law and government and write them into the
blanks below.

3. What did the ancient civilizations of Egypt and the Fertile Crescent have in
common?

A. Both developed flood control and irrigation technologies to boost food
production.
B. Both had a public code of law engraved on a huge stone.
C. Both were centered on the shores of the Mediterranean Sea.
D. Both developed systems of political democracy in which citizens could
vote.
4. Once a society developed agriculture and domesticated animals, food
surpluses and rising populations made possible which of the following
developments?
A. a nomadic lifestyle
B. towns
C. stone tools
D. stone carvings
Questions 5 and 6 refer to the following map.

5. In the Yellow River valley, floods deposit a fertile yellow soil called loess
that is easily worked by farmers.
Which of the following civilizations arose under geographic conditions
similar to those in ancient China?
A. the Aztecs
B. ancient Greece
C. ancient Rome
D. ancient Egypt
6. Which of the following statements is supported by the information in the
map?
A. The Yellow River is the only major river in China.
B. The Shang dynasty, or ruling family, controlled China for almost a
thousand years.
C. The Yellow River was probably the main trade route between Loyang
and Chengchow.
D. The Shang civilization traded more with Korea than with Manchuria.
Answers and explanations start on page 696.

Lesson 2: Feudalism to Nation States
Key Ideas
During the Middle Ages, the feudal system helped to stabilize
Europe.
A by-product of the Crusades was the opening up of trade routes and
city growth.
During the Renaissance, education grew in importance, and people
left the Catholic Church to establish Protestantism.

The Middle Ages in Europe lasted from about 500 to 1500 C.E. As the once
strong government of Rome weakened, Europe became vulnerable to
invasions from warring groups or tribes. A tribal ruler named Charlemagne
conquered most of Europe by 800. Charlemagne was able to stabilize this
large territory for a time. He established laws, spread Christianity, and
encouraged education and commerce. When Charlemagne died in 814, the
territories of Europe became unstable again, and the system of feudalism
emerged.
Under feudalism, kings granted control of land to nobles. A noble’s soldiers,
or knights, protected the noble’s estate, or manor. Peasants farmed at the
manor. Nobles paid taxes to kings; peasants paid taxes to nobles. As the
political boundaries among the kings’ lands became established, the feudal
system made life in Europe more peaceful over several hundred years.
To the east, the religion of Islam was founded during the early Middle Ages
by the prophet Muhammad, who was born in A.D. 570. The followers of
Islam, called Muslims, conquered large territories in the Middle East,
northern Africa, Spain, Persia, and India. They established a series of
empires. Many people in these conquered lands converted to Islam while
contributing their own knowledge and arts to the Muslim culture. Although
the Islamic Empire itself did not last, Islam and its culture have remained
strong.

GED® TEST TIP
To summarize a graph such as the one on page 481, ask
yourself: What is the topic of the graph? What is the main point
of the data? How could I say this in a sentence or two?
During the late Middle Ages, Christians and Muslim Turks fought over the
holy city of Jerusalem in a series of wars called the Crusades. Christians
gained control of Jerusalem from the Turks, but they ruled the city for less
than 90 years. A more lasting effect of the Crusades was to open up trade
between Europe and the Middle East and even China. As trade, money, and

merchants grew in importance in Europe, feudalism declined. People left the
manors and went to live and work in cities, where opportunities were greater.
Cities gained political, economic, and cultural importance.
During the Middle Ages, European nations began to form as monarchs
combined territories of small rulers and took advantage of the wealth of
cities. England’s monarchy was established by 1100. France won the
Hundred Years’ War against England and emerged as a strong nation under
its monarch. Spain united through the marriage of two rulers, Ferdinand and
Isabella, who had each controlled smaller states.
The Renaissance, which spread from Italy across Europe between 1300 and
1600, brought growth in education, science, and the arts. The Renaissance
also led to changes in the Catholic Church. During the Reformation in the
1500s, reformers criticized the church for abusing its power. Those who
believed that people should read the Bible themselves rather than follow the
pope split from the Catholic Church and formed the Protestant religion.
King Henry VIII of England broke from the Catholic Church and formed the
Church of England so he would not have to obey the pope.

Practice 2
1. According to the passage on page 480, what was the role of the knights in
feudal Europe?
A. to collect taxes for the king
B. to take care of livestock
C. to protect their noble’s land from attack
D. to administer justice
Question 2 is based on the text on page 480 and the following map.

2. Given the information on page 480, select the modern European nation in
which you are most likely to find evidence of Muslim arts and culture.
3. During the late Middle Ages, the growth of trade spurred a migration of
peasants from the manors to the towns. To which of the following events
is this most similar?
A. the migration of Puritans to the New World to escape religious
persecution in the 1600s
B. the migration of people from farms to industrial cities in the 1800s
C. the migration of political refugees to the United States in the 1900s
D. the migration of individuals with health problems from cold, damp
regions to warm, dry regions
4. At the time of the Reformation, which of the following was one of the
main differences between Roman Catholics and Protestants?
A. Roman Catholics accepted the authority of the pope and Protestants
did not.
B. Roman Catholics lived on the manors and Protestants lived in the
towns.
C. Roman Catholics supported the monarchies in their nations and
Protestants did not.
D. Roman Catholics led the Church of England under Henry VIII and
Protestants did not.
5. In England in the 1100s, any free man could bring a case before a royal

court headed by a circuit judge, who formed juries of local people. The
decisions of these courts were recorded and formed the basis for common
law, which was applied to everyone in the kingdom. In contrast, justice in
the manor courts, which were run by the nobles, could be fickle. There
were few written laws, and the verdicts could be overturned by the lord.
People usually preferred to be tried in royal courts rather than manor courts
because the royal courts valued which of the following?
A. accepted legal principles
B. harsh punishment
C. power for the local lord
D. fines rather than imprisonment
Question 6 refers to the following graph.

6. Which of the following best summarizes the information shown on the
graph?
A. The population of Western Europe showed the most growth between
the years 750 and 1000.
B. There were fewer than 50 million people living in Western Europe at
any given time.
C. The population of Western Europe showed almost constant growth
with only brief periods of decline.
D. The population of Western Europe fell to its lowest around the year
1450.

Answers and explanations begin on page 696.

Lesson 3: The Age of Revolutions
Key Ideas
In the American and French Revolutions, people fought against
unjust governments.
Revolution spread to Latin America, ending many colonial
governments there.
The Industrial Revolution caused sweeping changes in work, living
conditions, and social mobility.

Political revolutions often happen when people are unhappy about the
conditions resulting from their system of government. Political revolutions
may also be fueled by new ideas about who is best suited to govern. In the
Age of Revolutions, many people wanted more political power.
One important cause of the American Revolution was British taxation.
Although British citizens in England were represented in government through
Parliament, the American colonists did not have representatives in that
body. The colonists believed that they should not have to pay the special
taxes levied on them, since they had had no voice in determining the tax
laws. Although the colonists began by arguing for representation in the
British government, by 1776 they had declared themselves a sovereign
nation, the United States of America.
Revolutionaries in France were inspired by democratic ideas expressed in the
American colonies’ Declaration of Independence and the U.S.
Constitution. Unlike England, France had no Parliament; the French
monarch had absolute power. The nobility and the Church had many
privileges and paid no taxes, while ordinary citizens paid heavy taxes and had
few rights or freedoms. In 1789, the French people organized a National
Assembly—a law-making body to represent them. When King Louis XVI

fought against the establishment of the National Assembly, the French
Revolution began. Its turmoil lasted for ten years.

ON THE GED® TEST
As part of the GED® Social Studies Test, you may be provided
with basic historic information and asked to make comparisons
—such as the similarities and differences between two revolutions.
In Latin America, many colonized people, inspired in part by the American
and French Revolutions, began to shake off European rule. In Haiti, an island
in the Caribbean Sea, slaves led by Toussaint L’Ouverture overturned French
rule and established an independent nation in 1804. Mexican revolutionaries
finally won their independence from Spain in 1821. In South America,
revolutions rocked the continent until 1824, by which time most countries
had gained their independence.
Important revolutions are not always political. The Industrial Revolution
started in the late 1700s in the textile industry, when new equipment was
invented for spinning thread and weaving cloth. Instead of workers using
their own tools at home, factories could house many workers using machines
to produce much greater quantities. This factory model for large-scale
production spread along with steam engines and electricity. Workers moved
into factory towns and cities to work for wages. The Industrial Revolution
brought a mixture of benefits and problems—useful inventions, increasing
wealth, and new social mobility were offset by dangerous factory jobs, child
labor, crowded cities, and pollution.
The Industrial Revolution also brought sweeping social changes. The
economic mainstay of the European aristocracy had been farmland. After the
Industrial Revolution, manufacturing and trade became more important
economically than agriculture. Thus, the merchant classes became more
powerful. New ideas about political equality affected how people thought

about social equality as well.

Practice 3
1. According to the passage on page 482, which of the following had a great
influence on the French Revolution?
A. the Industrial Revolution
B. the Mexican Revolution
C. the U.S. Declaration of Independence
D. the British monarchy
Question 2 refers to the following paragraph and graph.
Before the French Revolution, the French were divided into three groups by
law, each with different privileges. In the First Estate were the higher clergy,
who were nobles, and the parish priests, who were commoners. The Second
Estate consisted of nobles who were not members of the clergy. The Third
Estate was made up of commoners, including the middle class and peasants.

2. Which of the following statements is supported by the paragraph and the
graph?
A. All members of the nobility belonged to the First Estate.
B. The members of the First Estate owned more property than members of
the Second Estate.

C. The distribution of wealth in prerevolutionary France favored the Third
Estate.
D. Members of the Third Estate owned the least amount of land per
person.
3. According to the information on page 482, the main difference between
the English and French governments before 1789 is that England (1)
, while France (2)
.
Select (1)

Select (2)

was a monarchy

was not a direct democracy

had a parliament

did not have a parliament

was a democratic republic

was not a monarchy

4. On what was the economic power of the aristocracy based in 18th-century
Europe?
A. moral superiority
B. attaining a high level of education
C. possessing large landholdings
D. belonging to the Church bureaucracy
5. Which of the following does the writer of the text on page 482 take for
granted that you know, but does not state outright?
A. The American colonists demanded representation in the British
government before they declared independence.
B. A sovereign nation is independent, having the power to govern itself.
C. Many colonies were influenced by the American and French
revolutions to seek independence.
D. As manufacturing and trade became more important, the merchant
classes gained power.
6. The Information Revolution of the late 20th century, spurred by the
availability of personal computers and the Internet, is most similar to

which of the following revolutions?
A. the American Revolution
B. the French Revolution
C. the Mexican Revolution
D. the Industrial Revolution
Answers and explanations start on page 696.

Lesson 4: Exploration, Colonialism, and
Wars
Key Ideas
Two devastating world wars occurred during the first half of the 20th
century.
The United States and Soviet Union emerged as superpowers after
World War II.
The superpowers faced off during the Cold War, which ended with
the breakup of the Soviet Union in 1991.

World War I resulted from nationalism and imperialism—the desire of
nations to extend their empires. This desire for expansion led to military
buildup. When war broke out in 1914 between Serbia and Austria-Hungary
over the assassination of an Austrian leader visiting Serbia, a chain reaction
started as other countries also declared war. Germany and Austria-Hungary
were the mainstays of the Central Powers, who fought against the Allies—
England, France, Russia, Serbia, and eventually the United States. When the
Central Powers finally lost the war, millions of people had been killed. The
war had devastated Europe, leaving many people jobless and homeless. In the
1918 Treaty of Versailles, Germany was blamed for the war and forced to
pay reparations to the Allies.

Revolution in Russia began during World War I. The Russian Czar refused
to pull out of the war, even though most Russians did not support
involvement. In 1917, the Czar and his family were assassinated, and the
Russian Revolution ended with Bolshevik leader Vladimir Lenin in power.
The Bolsheviks founded the Soviet Union as a communist nation with one
political party—the Communist Party.

GED® TEST TIP
You may be familiar with some of the world events covered on
the GED® Test. However, answer questions based on the
information provided on the test, even if it differs from what
you remember.
The Great Depression, which began in the United States when the stock
market crashed in 1929, affected many countries. One hard-hit nation was
Germany, which was still suffering economically and politically from its
defeat in World War I. By 1933, nearly half of German workers were
unemployed, and people were starving. Adolf Hitler, leader of the Nazi Party,
rose to power by appealing to German nationalism and promising to put people back to work. Hitler’s terrible form of nationalism involved
imprisoning and killing people who were not part of “the Aryan race.” Jews
were the main targets of Hitler’s campaign, now called the Holocaust. Hitler
wanted to take over all Europe, and because other powerful nations wanted to
avoid war, they let him annex Austria, then Czechoslovakia. But when Hitler
invaded Poland in 1939, England and France declared war on Germany, and
World War II began. Many nations went to war, including the United States.
Once again, Germany and the other Axis Powers (including Italy and Japan)
were defeated by the Allies. The United States dropped the first atomic
bomb on Hiroshima to end the war.
After World War II, the United States and the Soviet Union emerged as
superpowers. Former allies, they each led opposing groups of countries, one
group democratic, the other group communist. The two groups of nations so

distrusted each other that the period following World War II was called the
Cold War—a war fought through political and diplomatic contests instead of
battles. To catch up with the United States, the Soviet Union started to build
its own nuclear weapons, and the arms race began, soon followed by the
“space race.”
However, by 1990 the Soviet bloc was falling apart. The Soviet Union itself
split into 15 countries in 1991. People who had lived under repressive
governments for many years struggled to establish democracy—not only in
the former Soviet bloc, but also in Africa, Latin America, and Asia.

Practice 4
Questions 1 through 4 are based on the information on page 484.
1. As a result of the 1918 Treaty of Versailles, what did Germany have to do?
A. pay the Allies money to repair war damages
B. develop its military forces to protect Europe
C. adopt a communist government
D. promote nationalism among its people
2. What event was the immediate cause of England and France declaring war
on Germany at the beginning of World War II?
A. the annexation of Austria
B. the annexation of Czechoslovakia
C. the invasion of Poland
D. the invasion of France
3. Before the atomic bomb was dropped on Hiroshima, the Allies warned
Japan they would suffer “complete and utter destruction” unless they
surrendered. Despite the fact that 80,000 people were killed and 40,000
wounded by the bombing of Hiroshima, Japan still refused to surrender.
The United States then dropped a second atomic bomb on the city of
Nagasaki, killing 40,000 more people. After the second bombing, the

Japanese surrendered.
Japan’s refusal to surrender after the bombing of Hiroshima suggests that
the Japanese placed a high value on which of the following?
A. negotiation
B. national pride
C. the lives of military personnel
D. a lasting peace
4. Which of the following is a similarity between World War I and World
War II?
A. Both were confined to Europe.
B. Both occurred after the Russian Revolution.
C. Both involved the use of atomic weapons.
D. Both were won by the Allies.
Questions 5 and 6 refer to the following chart.
Casualties in World War II
Nation

Military
Dead

Military
Wounded

Civilian
Dead

Great Britain

398,000

475,000

65,000

Soviet Union

7,500,000

14,102,000

15,000,000

United States

292,000

671,000

very few

Germany

2,850,000

7,250,000

5,000,000

Japan

1,576,000

500,000

300,000

Source: The Second World War by Henri Michel

5. What was the main difference between the casualties sustained by the
United States and those sustained by other nations in World War II?
A. The United States had more military dead than wounded.

B. The United States sustained only a few civilian casualties.
C. The United States had the fewest wounded.
D. The United States had more civilian than military casualties.
6. The main reason that the Soviet Union had so many casualties is that it
was invaded by the German army, which got as far as the outskirts of
Moscow and Leningrad. There the Germans halted in 1941. Severe
winters, long supply lines back to Germany, and stiff resistance from the
Soviets ultimately defeated the Germans.
Which of the following events is most similar to the German invasion of
the Soviet Union?
A. the 1812 French invasion of Russia, which failed due to harsh weather
and lack of supplies
B. the occupation of Singapore by Japan in World War II, which gave
Japan control of Malaya
C. the 1941 Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, which drew the United
States into World War II
D. the 1945 Allied invasion of Europe, which liberated Europe from
German control
Answers and explanations start on page 697.

Lesson 5: Humans and the Environment
Key Ideas
When populations grow, decline, or shift, changes in geographic
regions occur.
Populations change as a result of many different political and
economic factors.
Population growth and urbanization have a negative impact on the
environment.

Populations—particularly the movement and growth of population groups—
play a major role in defining and altering geographic regions. A population
may be native to a geographic area, as the Taino, for example, were native to
the Caribbean when Columbus arrived there. Sometimes population groups
migrate over long distances, as did many Irish people who came to the
United States during the Potato Famine in the mid-1800s. However, when people feel strong ties to a place, they may stay there even when conditions
are unfavorable; they may even develop new economic and cultural strategies
that strengthen their population. The distribution of population within a
region depends on many factors, not all of which humans can control. People
tend to move where there are resources, jobs, and other favorable conditions.
But these conditions are ever changing, depending on politics, climate,
economic development, and so on.
Urban and rural development have a strong impact on the distribution of a
population. Industrialized regions generally see their populations shift away
from rural areas into cities and towns. Suburban development very often
follows urban growth. As cities become crowded, the urban population
spreads into the countryside, often taking up agricultural lands for housing
and commercial development. Agriculture also changes in most industrialized
regions. Farming is done on a larger scale by fewer people using more
mechanized tools. Industrialized regions usually can support a larger
population at a higher standard of living than nonindustrialized regions.
However, these regions also may lose some of their distinctive traditional
cultures, arts, farming methods, and so on.

GED® TEST TIP
Some questions give a definition and ask you to apply it. To
answer an application question such as number 2 on page 487,
check each of the answer options against the given definition.
When political boundaries are in dispute, or ethnic groups declare war on

each other, local population shifts may dramatically change the character of a
region. For example, during World War II, Hitler depopulated Europe of
millions of Jews through deportation and death camps. After World War II,
the state of Israel was established in the Middle East, drawing many Jews to
the region. Continuing conflicts within the Middle East have led to further
population shifts of different Arab and Jewish groups there.
When human populations grow, they significantly affect the natural
environment. Manufacturing and urbanization cause air and water
pollution. Commercial agriculture tends to degrade both soil and water.
Eventually food and water supplies become endangered. For example, these
problems, along with a loss of farmland to urbanization, are very prominent
in China today, where the government has been trying since the 1970s to
reduce population growth.
Overall, government policies and international agreements have not been
strong enough nor widely enforced when it comes to reducing the destructive
impact of growing populations, large cities, and damaging agricultural
methods in many parts of the world.

Practice 5
Questions 1 through 4 are based on the information on page 486.
1. What is migration?
A. a form of society in which people move on after they consume an
area’s resources
B. temporary travel to another geographic region to scout for resources
C. the move of an individual or population from one geographic area to
settle in another
D. the relative distribution of populations in urban and rural areas
2. Migration within a country’s borders is called internal migration. Which of
the following is an example of internal migration?
A. the movement of the Irish to the United States during the Potato

Famine in the 1800s
B. the westward movement of the American population from the 1700s to
the present
C. the movement of Mexican workers into the southwest United States
during the 1900s
D. the movement of people from former British colonies to Great Britain
3. Urban areas

suburban areas.

are more densely populated than
have been more recently settled than
contain more remnants of farms than
have more agricultural workers than
4. Which of the following technologies was the most likely contributor to the
rapid growth of suburbs in the United States?
A. the telephone
B. the telegraph
C. the airplane
D. the automobile
Questions 5 and 6 refer to the following graph.

5. What does the figure 9,039,000,000 represent?
A. the projected population of less developed nations in 2025
B. the projected population of less developed nations in 2050
C. the projected population of more developed nations in 2050
D. the projected total world population in 2050
6. Which of the following conclusions is supported by the data on the graph?
A. The total world population will double in the 50 years from 2000 to
2050.
B. About half the world’s population lives in the more developed nations.
C. Most of the population growth in the 50 years from 2000 to 2050 will
occur in the less developed nations.
D. Most of the population growth in the 50 years from 2000 to 2050 will
occur in the more developed nations.
Answers and explanations start on page 697.

Lesson 6: Using Resources Wisely
Key Ideas
Conservation means carefully using natural resources to help preserve
them for the future.
Conflicts over natural resources require the balancing of different
interests.
Government programs can promote conservation and encourage people to develop alternative energy sources.

Conservation means using natural resources—such as soil, plant and animal
life, water, air, and mineral reserves—carefully. Conservationists encourage
the sustainable use of resources—using resources in ways that do not
exhaust them for the future. Natural resources are either renewable or
nonrenewable. Renewable resources can be sustained through replacement.
For example, harvested plants can be replanted. Solar and wind energy are
also renewable, since their supply never runs out. Nonrenewable resources
are materials that humans use but cannot replace—such as petroleum and
natural gas, as well as minerals such as coal, copper, and iron.
Natural resources need to be protected for many reasons. Some reasons for
conservation are economic: natural resources are needed to produce goods
and services of economic value. Petroleum provides fuel to run equipment in
factories and to transport materials and goods. We also need wood and wood
products for building structures, making furniture, and manufacturing paper.
Other reasons for conserving resources relate to our need to sustain the
diverse ecosystems of Earth to help keep the planet healthy. These diverse
ecosystems help maintain the following resources: water; air; and plant,
animal, and human life. Finally, natural resources inspire our sense of beauty
and wonder; natural areas and materials play important roles in people’s
cultural and spiritual traditions.

ON THE GED® TEST
Some questions are based on important current topics such as
the development and conservation of resources. Reading the
newspaper will help you become familiar with many of these
issues.
When natural resources are scarce or become threatened, different people’s
interests can come into conflict. For example, water resources in a region
might not be adequate to provide clean drinking water, irrigate local farms,
sustain wildlife, and supply water for industrial development. If these
interests are not balanced, some people will lose what they need. These
problems become even more difficult when political boundaries are involved.
Perhaps one nation’s water supply comes from a river that flows through
another nation; if the second nation builds a dam on the river, it could cut
back the flow of water to the first nation. Such conflicts can be very difficult
to negotiate. Industry, agriculture, natural ecosystems, clean air and water,
and historical and cultural preservation—all these factors influence how people decide to allocate natural resources.
Many countries have laws that protect endangered species of plants and
animals. Industrial and agricultural interests have to be balanced against
biodiversity—the maintenance of many different species of organisms. New
international agreements attempt to protect the ozone layer in the
atmosphere, which is critical to maintaining Earth’s climate patterns. In some
nations—although not in the United States—high taxes on gasoline pay for
clean air programs and encourage people to reduce their use of cars. Fossil
fuels are relatively inexpensive and available, so industrialized regions are
highly dependent on them. But they are nonrenewable and cause a great deal
of pollution. Globally, we will have to develop more sus-tainable sources of
energy on a large scale—such as solar and wind energy—to keep our planet
healthy in the long run.

Practice 6
Questions 1 through 5 are based on the information on page 488.
1. What are renewable resources?
A. materials that will never run out or can be replaced if used
B. materials that we do not use and so can use at a later date
C. materials that we use but cannot replace
D. an incentive to conserve materials
2. Which of the following is an example of the sustainable use of a resource?
A. burning fossil fuels
B. strip mining
C. overgrazing livestock
D. rotating crops
3. Since conflicts over scarce or polluted resources sometimes cross national
boundaries, which of the following methods would be most likely to solve
problems related to these resources?
A. negotiating in an international forum
B. taking unilateral action
C. importing resources
D. selling resources
4. In the United States, there is disagreement about how to reduce
dependence on foreign oil. Some favor exploiting domestic sources of oil
even if that means polluting the environment. Others prefer to concentrate
on developing alternative, renewable sources of energy.
Which of the following best characterizes the underlying difference in
points of view between the pro-oil and pro-alternative energy factions?
A. self-sufficiency versus interdependence
B. competition versus cooperation

C. short-term benefit versus long-term benefit
D. patriotism versus internationalism
5. Which of the following actions could a family take to conserve
nonrenewable resources?
A. incinerate the trash
B. carpool to work and school
C. plant trees in the yard
D. burn more firewood
Questions 6 and 7 refer to the following chart.

6. Select the world region that currently produces the most natural gas.
7. Natural gas is a nonrenewable resource. As gas is produced for
consumption, reserves are depleted. Assume that each of the regions listed
above continues to produce natural gas at its current rate and does not
discover any additional reserves. Rank the regions below in the order in
which they will run out of natural gas, with (1) meaning the region will
run out of natural gas first and (4) meaning the region will run out of
natural gas last.

Answers and explanations start on page 697.

Geography and the World Practice
Questions
1. The Germanic tribes that invaded the Roman Empire had relatively simple
governments. There were few government officials and taxes. Rulers
depended on the loyalty of their warriors rather than on a government
bureaucracy. Germanic laws were based on custom and designed to
prevent warfare between families.
Which of the following is the best title for this passage?
A. How Germanic Tribes Governed
B. Germanic Tribes and the Roman Empire
C. The Invasion of the Roman Empire
D. Loyalty Among the Germanic Tribes
2. The mechanization of the textile industry, the invention of the steam
engine, and the development of the coal and iron industries contributed to
Great Britain’s lead in the Industrial Revolution. However, after 1850,
other nations began to challenge Great Britain’s lead. Belgium, France,
and Germany all industrialized quickly. By 1900, natural resources and
railroad building helped make the United States the leading industrial
nation.

Which of the following is the best summary of this passage?
A. The development of natural resources made Great Britain the leader in
the Industrial Revolution.
B. The Industrial Revolution started in Great Britain and spread
throughout the world.
C. The Industrial Revolution started in Great Britain and spread to
Europe, but by 1900 the United States was the leading industrialized
nation.
D. Plentiful natural resources and a vast railroad system were the
underpinnings of the Industrial Revolution in the United States.
Questions 3 and 4 refer to the following map.

3. Select the area on the map where the earliest civilizations in Africa

developed.
4. Which of the following statements is supported by information on the
map?
A. Over 800 years, several civilizations succeeded one another in western
Africa.
B. The Kingdom of Mali dominated western Africa for more than 500
years.
C. Timbuktu was an important center of learning in Songhai.
D. Gold and salt were transported along caravan trade routes in western
Africa.
Questions 5 through 8 refer to the following timeline.

5. Portugal dominated trade in the East Indies for most of the 1500s. Select
the event on the timeline that most likely first triggered Portugal’s
superiority in the region.
6. Which of the following statements is supported by information on the
timeline?
A. Spanish and Portuguese domination of exploration gave way to that of
the Dutch, French, and English.

B. Henry Hudson discovered more places in North America than did
Marquette and Joliet and Cartier.
C. Both Cartier and Da Gama explored North America on behalf of
France.
D. French explorers cooperated with American Indians in establishing
trade.
7. Instead of financing expeditions themselves, the rulers of Spain allowed
conquistadors to establish outposts in the Americas. The conquistador
financed his own expedition, but if he succeeded, he was allowed to keep
four-fifths of any treasure he found. Cortés was a conquistador who
became rich by conquering the Aztecs in Mexico.
was also a conquistador.
Da Gama
Pizarro
Cartier
8. Which of the following is the best title for this timeline?
A. The Spanish Explorers and Empire
B. The Age of Exploration
C. History of the 16th and 17th centuries
D. European Colonies in the Americas
Question 9 refers to the following graph.

9. Which of the following statements is supported by the graph?
A. Before the Cold War began, defense spending was at an all-time high.
B. Defense spending remained steady throughout the Cold War.
C. Defense spending declined steadily during the period 1976 to 1990.
D. After the Cold War ended, defense spending began to fall.
10. When establishing colonies, European nations wanted their colonies to be
economically self-sufficient. That meant that each colony paid for its
government salaries and the cost of building and maintaining roads,
railroads, and government buildings. To do this, European colonists or the
colonial governments exported natural resources like gold or copper or
grew cash crops like sugar or rubber.
Which of the following statements is an opinion rather than a fact?
A. European countries had similar goals in establishing their colonies.
B. Colonies should be economically independent.
C. European nations built railroads, roads, and government buildings in
their colonies.
D. Colonies provided natural resources that colonists could export.
Questions 11 and 12 refer to the following passage.
Desertification, the spread of deserts, is usually caused in part by human
activity. Agricultural practices, such as clearing trees and brush, depleting the
soil through plowing and planting, overgrazing, and irrigation, contribute to
the sterilization and erosion of the land. A period of drought is often enough
to tip the balance toward a desert ecosystem.
For example, in the 1930s, excessive plowing, overgrazing, and well-digging
left the American Great Plains vulnerable to desertification. A lengthy
drought led to conditions so severe the topsoil was blown away, creating
what is known as the Dust Bowl. Formerly valuable farmland became almost
worthless in a period of years. The area was spared permanent desertification
only because normal rainfall eventually resumed.
11. Which of the following was the most likely result of the Dust Bowl?

A. the Great Depression of the 1930s, an economic downturn
B. the migration of thousands of farm families to other regions
C. the permanent cessation of agriculture in the Great Plains
D. restoration of the Great Plains ecosystem as it was before agriculture
12. Which of the following is an example of desertification?
A. the shrinking of the Greenland ice sheet
B. the shifting sandbars along the coast of Lake Michigan
C. the extension of grazing onto land that is part of the National Forest
system
D. the spread of the Sahara into the grazing land on its southern border
13. According to experts in world agriculture, the poor nutrition and
starvation of millions of people stems not from a global scarcity of
resources, but from the uneven distribution of resources among nations.
Experts claim the world has the resources to feed its population if the
political will of the richer nations were brought to bear on this problem.
Which of the following is an opinion rather than a fact?
A. Millions of people worldwide are undernourished.
B. The world has abundant natural resources.
C. Natural resources are distributed unevenly among nations.
D. The problem of feeding the world’s population is a matter of political
will rather than one of resources.
14. The 2000 Census showed that the United States has 281,421,906 people,
an increase of 13.2 percent over the 1990 Census. Population growth and
immigration accounted for this increase. The state population counts
showed the largest relative gains in the South and West, with Nevada’s
population increase the highest at 66.3 percent. Because state population
figures are used to allocate seats in the House of Representatives, every
ten years a shift in political power occurs. In 2000, states in the Northeast
and Midwest lost seats, and states in the West and South picked up seats.
Which of the following is implied by the paragraph?

A. Nevada had a 66.3 percent population increase.
B. Nevada gained seats in the House.
C. People moved away from the Northeast and Midwest.
D. The U.S. population in 2000 was about 281 million people.
Questions 15 and 16 refer to the following map.

15. Which of the following people is most likely to use the map above?
A. a geologist surveying land features in the Philadelphia area
B. a visitor to Philadelphia
C. an employee of the Federal Aviation Administration
D. a commercial airline pilot
16. Which of the following statements is supported by the data on the map?
A. More than 20 airlines have landing rights at Philadelphia International
Airport.
B. Route 95 borders the south side of Philadelphia International Airport.
C. It is possible to get to Philadelphia International Airport by plane, car,
or rail.
D. Labels for terminals and parking areas are coordinated to provide
convenient parking.
Answers and explanations start on page 698.

UNIT 4

Science
About the Test
The GED® Science Test evaluates your ability to understand, interpret, and
apply science information. You will have 90 minutes to answer 34 to 40
questions that are based on reading passages, graphics such as diagrams,
tables, graphs, and maps, or a combination of the two.
You will need a minimum score of 145 to pass the Science Test, which is one
of the four tests you will need to pass in order to earn a high school
equivalency diploma.

Content Areas
Life Science (40%) topics include cell structures and processes, human body
systems, health and nutrition, heredity and reproduction, genetics and DNA,
evolution and natural selection, and the organization of ecosystems.
Earth and Space Science (20%) topics include the structure of Earth, plate
tectonics, geological cycles and processes, renewable and nonrenewable
natural resources, weather and climate, the solar system, and the universe.
Physical Science (40%) topics include atoms and molecules, properties and

states of matter, chemical reactions, energy and work, motion and forces,
waves, electricity, and magnetism.

Science Practices
In addition to testing your understanding of science passages and graphics,
Science Test questions are based on your understanding of skills that are used
in scientific study and investigation. These skills are called Science
Practices, and they introduce this unit on pages 500–516. After you study
these prac-tices, you will reinforce them as you work through the unit. The
science practices include the following:
Comprehend Scientific Presentations to interpret passages and
graphics.
Use the Scientific Method to design investigations, reason from data,
and work with findings.
Reason with Scientific Information to evaluate conclusions with
evidence.
Apply Concepts and Formulas to express scientific information and
apply scientific theories.
Use Probabilities and Statistics in a science context.

Computer-Based Science Test Question Formats
You will work with 5–6 question formats on the Science Test. Many of the
questions will be in the familiar multiple-choice format, but you will need to
be acquainted with the other formats as well.

GED® TEST TIP
If a multiple-choice question seems difficult, start by
eliminating two choices that seem unlikely. Of the two that are
left, select the one that makes the most sense. Remember, you

can flag questions on the Science Test and come back to them if
you have time.
Multiple-choice questions have four options (A through D). You will click
on the best answer.

A scientist concludes that frog and toad populations worldwide are in
decline due to stratospheric ozone depletion, which results in more
ultraviolet radiation from the sun reaching the Earth’s surface.
Which excerpt from the text most directly supports this conclusion?
A. “Embryos were examined at 12-hour intervals and the
time from egg-laying to hatching was recorded for both
groups.”
B. “Ultraviolet radiation causes genetic mutations and
abnormally slow growth rates in the embryos of most
species of frogs and toads, thus negatively impacting
survival rates.”
C. “The control group was kept in a fully shaded enclosure,
and UV levels were measured in both enclosures on a daily
basis.”
D. “For example, increased exposure to ultraviolet radiation
may cause skin cancer in cattle.”

Fill-in-the-blank questions will require you to type a word, phrase, or
number in a box that appears on the screen.

Type your answers in the boxes:
A supplier of snapdragon seeds to the retail market is considering the
genetics of snapdragon flower color. Red and white alleles display

incomplete dominance; a plant with one red and one white allele will
have pink flowers.
The seed supplier crosses a homozygous red snapdragon and
homozygous white snapdragon. What is the likelihood that each seed
produced will result in a certain flower color?
Red
White
Pink
Yellow

%
%
%
%

Drop-down questions give you the opportunity to click on the correct
response to complete a statement.

The sugar glider is a pouched mammal, or
, that is native to
. It is one of several gliding
that behave
similarly to flying squirrels. However, sugar gliders and flying squirrels
are not close relatives; rather, their similar behavior is the result
of evolution.

Hot-spot items consist of a graphic image. You will need to click on one or
more “points” on the graphic as shown at the top of the next page.

The graph shows the relationship between an urban population of
Peregrine Falcons and their primary prey species, feral rock pigeons,
over time.
Select the area on the graph that represents the Peregrine Falcon

population at time A.
To remove a point, place the arrow over the point and click the left
mouse button.

Drag-and-drop items require you to click on a small image, words, or
numerical expression and to drag and drop it in a specified location on the
computer screen.

Identify the independent and dependent variable in the experiment.
Drag and drop the correct variable into each box.

Math Problems on the Science Test
Many science investigations use mathematics. For that reason, there will be
math questions on the GED® Science Test. You will focus on math skills in
this unit with the Science Practices lessons on pages 510–513.

Day

Noontime Temperature
in Degrees Fahrenheit

April 15

58.0

May 15

65.4

June 15

76.9

July 15

88.2

August 15

87.3

What was the approximately temperature in degrees Celsius at noon on
July 15?
You MAY use the calculator.
A. 10.5
B. 31.2
C. 42.8
D. 58.6

Solution:
Step 1: Write the equation

Step 2: Substitute 88.2 for F in the equation because the Fahrenheit
temperature on July 15 was 88.2.
Step 3: Use the calculator to find the answer.

GED® TEST TIP
You are encouraged to purchase a handheld version of the
Texas Instruments TI-30XS MultiView™ calculator for
practice as you work through this book. You can buy one at
office or school supply stores.
Although you do not have to use a calculator, you may use either a handheld
version or an on-screen version of the TI-30XS MultiView™ calculator on
the Science Test. Some problems will say: You MAY use your calculator.
When you see that language, the calculator icon appears at the top of the
screen. If you cannot remember how to use the calculator, you can open the
online Calculator Reference Sheet.
You can click the links to open, move, and close both the online Texas
Instruments TI-30XS MultiViewTM calculator and the Calculator
Reference Sheet. You will want to move them on the computer screen so that
they don’t block the problem. Also remember that you will have an off-line
wipe-off board that you can use as scratch paper.

CHAPTER 1

Science Practices
Lesson 1: Comprehend Scientific
Presentations
Key Ideas
GED® Science Test presentations consist of text, graphics, or a
combination of the two.
Understanding science presentations on the Science Test requires
understanding the main idea or point.
Main ideas in science materials are supported by specific facts,
details, or evidence.

The GED® Science Test consists of questions based on science passages and
graphics. To comprehend science presentations, you need to understand main
ideas and their supporting details.
The main idea of a science presentation or graphic is its topic or the writer’s
point. Use this science diagram to practice finding the main idea.

▶ What is the topic of this diagram?
(1) the components of a dry cell battery
(2) how a dry cell battery powers machinery
The correct answer is choice (1). The diagram displays the different
components (that is, the parts) of a dry cell battery. It does not show the
process by which the battery actually operates or powers machinery, so
choice (2) is incorrect.
Science writers support their main ideas with details, facts, and evidence.

GED® TEST TIP
To answer GED® Science Test questions based on a passage
or graphic, ask yourself, “What is the main point? What
evidence or details are used to support it?”
Read the paragraph below and answer the question.
Earthquakes can be classified as either surface earthquakes or deepfocus earthquakes. Scientists agree that surface earthquakes occur
when rock in Earth’s crust fractures to relieve stress. Deep-focus
earthquakes originate from seismic activity more than 300 kilometers
below Earth’s surface. The causes of deep-focus earthquakes remain a
subject of debate, but scientists believe they may be caused by the

pressure of fluids trapped in Earth’s tectonic plates.
▶ Which of the following details supports the main point of this paragraph?
(1) The causes of deep-focus earthquakes remain a subject of debate
among scientists.
(2) Surface earthquakes are caused by stress in Earth’s crust, while deepfocus earthquakes may be caused by pressure.
The correct answer is choice (2). The main point of the paragraph is that
earthquakes can be classified into two types based on their causes, and choice
(2) provides supporting details that illustrate the differences between the two
types. While (1) is mentioned in the paragraph, it is not a fact that supports
the main point about the classification of earthquakes.
NOTE: you will need to know the following definitions. A fact is simply an
observation. A law is description, repeatedly observed to be true, of a
phenomenon and how it occurs. A theory is a well-tested and generally
accepted explanation of why a phenomenon occurs.

Practice 1
Questions 1 through 3 are based on the passage below.
Despite the prevalence of type 2 diabetes, the causes of the disease
remain somewhat uncertain. It is likely that some combination of
genetics and lifestyle contributes to the development of type 2
diabetes. However, scientists have not fully determined the roles
played by various lifestyle factors (such as diet and exercise).
For Americans, one contributing factor may be high sugar
consumption. Sugar from food is broken down and absorbed into the
bloodstream, and insulin is required for the body to be able to use that
sugar. In a study of individuals 18–25 years old who consumed more
than the recommended amount of sugar daily, it was shown that the
majority had significantly elevated levels of glucose (that is, sugar) in
their blood but normal levels of insulin. In other words, these subjects

could not produce enough insulin to allow their bodies to use the
amount of sugar they were consuming. Elevated blood glucose levels
may put individuals consuming high amounts of sugar at higher risk
of developing type 2 diabetes.
1. Which one of the following is the topic of the entire passage?
A. sources of sugar in Americans’ diet
B. the role of insulin in metabolizing sugar from food
C. the causes of type 2 diabetes
D. how to prevent type 2 diabetes
2. Which of the following is the main idea of the first paragraph?
A. It is likely that sugar consumption contributes to the development of
type 2 diabetes.
B. It is likely that genetics plays a role in the development of type 2
diabetes.
C. Researchers have discovered the causes of type 2 diabetes.
D. The causes of type 2 diabetes are not fully understood.
3. The main idea of the second paragraph is that high sugar consumption may
put individuals at greater risk of developing type 2 diabetes. Which of the
following details supports that main idea?
A. Sugar from food is absorbed into the bloodstream.
B. A study of 18–25 year olds showed that a majority did not produce
enough insulin to offset the high amounts of sugar they were
consuming.
C. A study of 18–25 year olds showed that high sugar consumption
interacted with genetic factors in a majority of those individuals in
order to suppress insulin production.
D. It has not been proven that sugar is a contributing factor to the
development of type 2 diabetes.
Question 4 is based on this graphic.

How Topography Contributes to Precipitation

4. Which statement correctly describes the process depicted in the graphic
above?
A. As moist, flowing air encounters rising elevations, it cools, which
causes condensation, a stage that precedes precipitation and cloud
development.
B. Once above the tree line, flowing air is likely to slow down and stop
moving, and then collect in the form of snow.
C. Clouds dissipate before encountering mountain peaks.
D. Moist air flows from the west, while drier air usually flows from the
east.
Answers and explanations begin on page 699.

Lesson 2: Use the Scientific Method
Key Ideas
The scientific method is used to investigate events and to acquire
knowledge.
Scientists follow a series of procedures involving observing,
collecting information, and forming a hypothesis.

After the hypothesis has been tested in an experiment or study,
scientists draw a conclusion.

The scientific method is a set of techniques that scientists use to investigate
observable facts and occurrences and to acquire new knowledge. Here are the
steps in the scientific method:
1. Observe a phenomenon and formulate a question about it. The
scientific method starts with a question about something that you
observe. Formulate the question about something that you can measure.
2. Collect data about the phenomenon you are studying. Scientific study
is founded on data, or observable facts, which are used to describe a
phenomenon.
3. Form a hypothesis. A hypothesis is an educated guess about the
answer to your question.
4. Test the hypothesis through an experiment. Your experiment should
be a fair test of the hypothesis. You may need to adjust the experiment.
You would do so by changing only one factor at a time while
controlling other factors. You should also repeat the experiment to
make sure the first results are valid.
5. Draw a conclusion about the hypothesis based on the experiment.
When the experiment is complete, you may conclude that your
hypothesis was supported by the data or that it was not, in which case
you may formulate a new hypothesis.

ON THE GED® TEST
The GED® Science Test may present an experiment and ask
you to answer multiple-choice questions or to write a Short
Response to a question about it.
Read about scientific observation and answer the question below.

Scientists observed unusual plant and algae growth in a pond. They
sampled the water and also discovered very high concentrations of
bacteria. Significant increases in the growth of plants, algae, and
bacteria in ponds are often caused by an excess of phosphates and
nitrates in the water. The pond was fairly close to neighboring
farmland, and two streams carried water from the farm to the pond.
▶ What could be a sound hypothesis about the growth in the pond?
(1) Runoff from the neighboring farm may be carrying excessive
phosphates and nitrates from fertilizers into the pond.
(2) Proximity to farmland is the cause of plant and algae growth in ponds
and other bodies of water.
If you chose (1), you are correct. That hypothesis is an educated guess about
the reason for the unusual plant and algae growth in the pond. It could be
tested by an experiment that compares samples from the pond water to
samples from streams coming from neighboring fields. Choice (2) is an
assertion that is very general and cannot be measured in this specific
situation.
The phenomenon you are studying is called the dependent variable. A factor
that you believe might be affecting that phenomenon is called the
independent variable. In the example above, the unusual plant and algae
growth would be the dependent variable. The runoff from the neighboring
farm would be the independent variable.

Practice 2.1
Questions 1 through 3 are based on this passage.
A majority of teenagers develop acne, but scientists still struggle to explain
its cause. It has long been thought that bacteria play a role, although until
recently it was assumed that role was purely detrimental—contributing to
acne. However, a team of researchers began to wonder whether different
strains of bacteria might impact acne in different ways.

The research team studied 49 individuals with acne and 52 individuals
without acne, and the researchers collected samples of bacteria from the nasal
pores of all those individuals. The researchers found that some combinations
of bacterial strains were highly likely to be found in clear-skinned
individuals, while other combinations were highly likely to be found in
individuals with acne.
After carefully analyzing their data, the scientists concluded that, while some
bacterial combinations likely contribute to acne, other bacterial combinations
may actually help to ward it off. The researchers suggested that, if further
studies confirm these findings, we may want to treat acne by encouraging the
growth of helpful bacteria.
1. Use the boxes below to identify the researchers’ independent and
dependent variables.

2. What was the researchers’ hypothesis?
A. Combinations of bacteria are a major cause of acne.
B. Different kinds of bacteria may impact acne differently.
C. We may want to change the way we treat acne, treating it by
encouraging the growth of beneficial bacteria.
D. Some combinations of bacteria may actually help ward off acne.
3. What conclusion did the researchers reach based on their data?
A. Combinations of bacteria are a major cause of acne.
B. Acne sufferers have more types of bacterial strains in their facial pores
than do non-sufferers.
C. The way we currently treat acne is misguided.

D. Some combinations of bacteria may actually help ward off acne.
Question 4 is based on the following information.
Suppose that you notice your right knee hurts every time you play softball.
You suspect that one of the movements involved in playing softball is
causing your knee to hurt, but you are not sure which movement is the
culprit. You decide to do a scientific investigation to find out more.
4. Match each of the following steps of the scientific method with a phase of
your investigation (listed below the table).
a) Form a hypothesis.
b) Design a test for your
hypothesis.
c) Collect data to test your
hypothesis.
d) Form a conclusion based on
the data from your test.
i) You make a list of each of the movements involved in softball. In the off
season (when you are not playing entire games), you plan to perform
each movement several times without performing the others.
ii) Based on the data you collected in your experiment, you think it is
likely that stopping suddenly after running a short distance is indeed
the cause of your knee pain.
iii) Based on your experience, you make a guess about which of the
movements involved in playing softball puts the greatest stress on the
knees. You suspect that it may be stopping suddenly after running a
short distance.
iv) After performing each movement in isolation, record how your knee
feels. Let your knee recover between tests of each type of movement.
Answers and explanations start on page 699.

Taking Samples
In step 2 of the scientific method, scientists collect data. In the earlier
example in which scientists were studying pond water, they sampled the
water. In the practice passage on the previous page, researchers collected
samples of bacteria from nasal pores to study acne. A sample is a portion of
the entire thing or population that is being studied. It is usually impractical
or even unethical to study, for example, all the water in a pond (one would
have to drain the pond, killing many of the life forms in it) or every
bacterium in every nasal pore of every teenager in the world. This is why
scientists take samples.

Key Ideas
Well-designed scientific experiments seek to control for possible
sources of bias.
Most statistical research uses sample data rather than data from entire
populations.
In order for a scientist to draw inferences about a population from
sample data, the sample must be large enough and representative.

To be able to make valid inferences about the entire population on the basis
of data from samples, scientists must follow certain guidelines. A major
concern is that the sample taken may not be representative of the entire
population—that is, the sample may differ from the population in an
important way. An unrepresentative sample introduces bias into the results of
the study.
One way to prevent bias is to select a large enough sample size to reduce the
probability that, by random chance, the sample differs significantly from the
population.
▶ Think about the scientists who are studying bacteria in pond water. Which
of the following sample sizes is more likely to lead to valid inferences
about the pond’s water?

(1) One sample from near the spring that supplies the pond with water
(2) Ten samples from various places in the pond

GED® TEST TIP
When you are asked about the quality of a scientific study,
consider whether the data were gathered from a sample similar
to the population of interest.
The correct answer is statement (2). If the scientists studying pond water took
just one sample of water, that sample might happen to contain only a few
bacteria, and the scientists would conclude incorrectly that the entire pond
has a low concentration of bacteria. On the other hand, if they took 10
samples of water from different places, the samples would likely be different,
or heterogeneous, and more accurately represent the pond as a whole. It
would be unlikely that so many samples would all have fewer bacteria than
the pond water in general. Thus, the chance of basing a conclusion on a
misrepresentative sample would be reduced.
Furthermore, scientists use randomization to increase the chance of valid
results. Randomization is used to assign samples to experimental conditions.
If, for example, the scientists conducted an experiment to find out whether
pond bacteria grow more in the presence of phosphates, such as those found
in farm runoff, they would begin by taking samples of pond water. Then they
would randomly assign half the samples of pond water to a control group,
which would not receive any treatment. They would assign the other half to
an experimental group, to which they would add phosphates. Then the
researchers would measure bacterial growth in both groups and determine
statistically whether there was a difference.
Sometimes it is impractical or unethical to select a sample from the
population at random and then subject part of that sample to a treatment.
▶ Suppose that the researchers above wanted to study whether greater amounts
of farm runoff correlates with fewer fish in ponds. What should they do?

(1) Identify a random sample of 50 ponds. Order the farmers near half the
ponds to limit chemical runoff and order the farmers near the other
ponds to increase runoff.
(2) Identify a random sample of 25 ponds where there is a high level of
chemical runoff from farms and identify another random sample of 25
ponds where there is a low level of farm runoff.
Statement (2) is correct. The researchers could not force some farmers to
create more runoff in order to make a treatment group of ponds. For one
thing, the farmers would likely not want to change their agricultural practices.
In addition, potentially doing environmental damage would be unethical.
Working with the samples in statement (2), the researchers would observe the
numbers of the fish per volume of water and compare the two groups.
This type of study, in which the scientist does not manipulate the conditions,
is an observational study. A risk is that the samples differ from each other in
a relevant way, besides the variable being studied, that affects the results. For
example, the ponds with low farm runoff might also happen to be in an area
with geology that gives the water a different pH, resulting in different fish
populations for a reason that has nothing to do with agricultural chemicals.

Practice 2.2
1. An _______ involves introducing a change to the treatment group,
whereas in an ________, the treatment group is based on current behavior.
A. experiment; observational study
B. observational study; experiment
C. observational study; observational study
D. experiment; experiment
2. Luke is conducting a survey to determine how effective his high school’s
ban on vending machines has been in reducing the amount of junk food
students eat. The survey asks students how much junk food they used to
eat and how much they eat now. Luke sends the survey to the members of
his soccer team, many of whom used to get a snack from the vending

machines after practice. If half of the team members respond to the
survey, will Luke have reliable data? Why or why not?
A. no, because Luke did not survey the team members before the vending
machines were removed
B. no, because the survey is not a random sample of the relevant
population
C. yes, because at least some of the survey respondents used the vending
machines
D. yes, because the soccer team members likely come from a variety of
backgrounds
3. Researchers for a healthcare network want to determine whether
complications are more likely when women give birth in a hospital or at
home. They identify records of 200 women who have given birth in the
last year, half in the hospital and half at home, and compare the number of
complications in each group. Which of the following correctly explains a
potential source of bias in this study?
A. The researchers did not take into account the number of women in
each group.
B. Some women do not give birth in either a hospital or at home, and
those women are not included in the study.
C. Some complications are more serious than others, and this study does
not weight the severity of complications.
D. The women were not randomly assigned to groups, so another factor
besides where they give birth could affect complications.
Answers and explanations begin on page 700.

Lesson 3: Reason with Scientific
Information
Key Ideas

Reasoning with scientific information requires citing specific
evidence to support a conclusion.
In some cases, an existing theory can be challenged by new data or
evidence.
One of the ways scientists use information is in making predictions.

Some GED® Science questions require recognizing or citing specific
evidence to support a conclusion. Another type of question may ask you to
judge whether a conclusion or a scientific theory—a substantiated
explanation of the natural world—is challenged by particular data or
evidence.
Use the graph below to practice scientific reasoning.

▶ Which conclusion is supported by the data on the graph?
(1) The rate of infant deaths in the United States experienced its sharpest
decline between roughly 1940 and the late 1950s.
(2) In each year between 1940 and 2009, there were fewer infant deaths
than in the year before.

GED® TEST TIP

When you interpret a line graph, carefully follow the direction
of each line to see its trend. You can use trends to make
predictions based on data.
The correct answer is choice (1). The graph shows that the rate of infant
mortality decreased most sharply between the years of 1940 and the late
1950s. After the late 1950s, it continued to decrease, but more gradually.
Choice (2) is not a true statement based on the graph: around 1960, there was
an uptick in the rate of infant deaths.
Other questions will ask you to make a prediction based on evidence or data
that the test provides to you. Based on the trend observed, scientists use data
to predict, or forecast, what they think may happen in the future.
▶ Which of the following predictions is based on the graph above?
(1) Since there has not been an increase in infant deaths since 1960, there
will likely be such an increase sometime soon.
(2) The rate of infant deaths is unlikely to experience sharp declines in the
near future.
Choice (2) is correct: the line on the graph shows the trend in infant mortality
has been one of very gradual decrease since the 1950s. A good prediction
based on that pattern would be that the trend of gradual decline is likely to
continue. The graph shows a downward trend, but gives no information to
suggest a future increase, so choice (1) is incorrect.

Practice 3
1. Inertia causes an object to resist changes in its state of motion. In other
words, inertia causes an object at rest to resist any attempt to set it in
motion. Similarly, inertia causes an object in motion to resist any attempt
to stop its motion. Objects with greater mass have greater inertia.
These figures represent the mass of two objects:
Brick:

100 grams

Block of wood:

70 grams

Which of the following is supported by the information above?
A. It would require more effort to break the brick than to break the block
of wood.
B. If both objects were currently sitting still, it would require more effort
to push the block of wood across the floor than it would to push the
brick across the floor.
C. If both objects were currently sitting still, it would require more effort
to push the brick across the floor than it would to push the block of
wood across the floor.
D. The brick would absorb water more readily than would the block of
wood.
2. In the last several decades, the spider population has exploded on the
island of Guam: parts of the island have as many as 40 times more spiders
than nearby islands do. One scientist has concluded that the explosion in
the Guam spider population is due to an increase in the population of an
invasive species of brown tree snake. The snake was introduced into
Guam in the 1940s but was not introduced into the neighboring islands.
The brown tree snake preys on birds.
Which one of the following, if true, makes the scientist’s conclusion more
likely?
A. The birds that the brown tree snake eats are the primary predators of
spiders on Guam.
B. The brown tree snake is typically introduced into islands via ships
carrying tourists. Guam and the islands nearby have long been popular
tourist spots.
C. Brown tree snakes eat spiders as well as birds.
D. In the rainy season, the island of Guam can have more than 40 times as
many spiders as it did ten years ago.
Questions 3 and 4 are based on the following passage:

Melting ice sheets in Greenland and Antarctica have the potential to
contribute significantly to rising sea levels in the next century. Some ice
sheets melt more quickly than others, and scientists have wondered why. A
team of researchers recently used data from both satellites and radar to study
the composition of many of the ice sheets in Greenland and Antarctica. They
found that some of the ice sheets formerly thought to sit on rock actually sit
on water. This finding could be significant because it may be the case that ice
sheets sitting on water tend to melt more quickly than those sitting on rock.
3. Which of the following is a prediction scientists might make based on the
information above?
A. If large areas of ice sheets sit on rock, the rising of sea levels may
proceed more quickly than had previously been predicted.
B. If large areas of ice sheets sit on water, the rising of sea levels may
proceed more quickly than had previously been predicted.
C. Ice sheets in Greenland will likely melt more quickly than ice sheets in
Antarctica.
D. All the ice sheets that are melting more quickly will be found to be
sitting on water.
4. A scientist predicts that the ice sheets sitting on water will collectively
discharge more water into the ocean than will those sitting on rock. Which
of the following facts, if true, might weaken that prediction?
A. Most of the ice sheets sitting on water are covering inland lakes with
no access to the ocean.
B. Water sitting under ice sheets flows directly into the ocean.
C. Ice in a glass of water will melt even if the room is very cold.
D. Radar used alone is an unreliable way to assess the composition of ice
sheets.
Answers and explanations start on page 700.

Lesson 4: Express and Apply Scientific

Information
Key Ideas
Scientific information can be conveyed in multiple forms: in words,
graphics, or formulas.
Scientific formulas use numbers, letters, and symbols to represent a
relationship or process.
An important science reasoning concept is the ability to apply a
scientific concept to a different situation.

Scientific information can be expressed in different forms. On the GED®
Science Test, you may be asked to find relationships among science passages,
graphics, formulas, or equations.
Scientific equations for chemical reactions often use these symbols:
Symbol

Meaning

+

Positive symbol separates two or more
reactants or products from one another.

→

Yield symbol separates reactants from
products and shows the reaction direction.

⇆

Reversible reaction symbol indicates that
the reaction can proceed in both directions.

For example, here is the general chemical equation for what happens when
carbon (C) is burned:

ON THE GED® TEST
When you are given a science concept and asked which one of

the choices is the best example, carefully eliminate the three
that do not have all the same characteristics.
C + O2 → CO2
▶ Which statement describes the process in the equation?
(1) Carbon combines with oxygen to produce carbon dioxide.
(2) Carbon creates oxygen, which takes on another oxygen atom in order to
produce carbon dioxide.
The correct answer is statement (1). In this case, carbon and oxygen (O2)
combine without losing any of their components. The result is carbon
dioxide, a molecule made up of one carbon atom and two oxygen atoms. (The
prefix di- means “two,” so carbon dioxide means “a C and two Os.”) The
plus sign on the left-hand side of the equation indicates that carbon and
oxygen are separate reactants, not that carbon creates oxygen. Thus,
statement (2) is incorrect.
Other questions may ask you to understand a science concept and relate it to
a specific situation.
The term desertification describes a chain of events in which so much
soil erodes from land that the land can no longer support plant or
animal life. The lack of plant life allows for further soil erosion,
making the land even more barren. It is very difficult to reverse
desertification.
▶ Which of the following could be an example of the early stages of
desertification?
(1) In a certain valley, overgrazing has nearly eliminated plant life. This
lack of vegetation has led to rapid soil erosion.
(2) In a certain valley, the climate is arid, and soil erosion has occurred
when the infrequent rains arrive. Farmers have devised an irrigation
system to grow crops and thus reverse the rate of soil erosion.

Choice (1) is correct. Soil erosion is the cause of desertification, so the valley
may be in the early stages of desertification. In choice (2), farmers have
found a way to combat erosion, so this valley does not appear to be
undergoing desertification.

Practice 4
Questions 1 through 4 are based on the information below.
Imagine a substance (such as salt or sugar) dissolved in a liquid (such as
water or alcohol). The liquid in which the substance is dissolved is called the
solvent. Osmosis is the diffusion (movement) of a solvent across a
semipermeable membrane (a barrier that allows some substances to pass
through it). The solvent moves from the side of the membrane with less
dissolved material to the side of the membrane with more dissolved material.
The result of osmosis is an equilibrium: the state in which the rate at which
the solvent flows across the membrane at the same rate in both directions.
Gillian conducted an experiment to see how quickly various liquids with a
specific amount of sugar dissolved in them would undergo osmosis. She used
vats of the same size with semipermeable membranes separating one side of
the vat from the other, and she put equal quantities of various liquids in both
sides:

1. Gillian used one of the vats to test the rate of diffusion of liquid acetone in
the process of osmosis. What did she most likely put on the two sides of

the semipermeable membrane in that vat?
Side A

Side B

A.

Pure acetone

Sugar in a glass container,
submerged in acetone

B.

A 50 percent solution of
sugar in acetone

A 50 percent solution of
sugar in acetone

C.

Pure acetone

A solution of sugar in
acetone

D.

Pure acetone

Pure acetone

Gillian’s experiment yielded the following results.
Solvent

Time Required to Reach
Equilibrium

Water

20 minutes

Acetone

25 minutes

Acetic acid

18 minutes

Formic acid

15 minutes

2. Based on the table above, which solvent had the highest rate of diffusion?
A. water
B. acetone
C. acetic acid
D. formic acid
3. Based on the table above, calculate the average (mean) time required for
the solvents to reach equilibrium.
4. Osmosis is the reason why it is unhealthy and potentially dangerous to
drink seawater. If you drink seawater, which contains a high concentration

of salts and other dissolved material, some of the dissolved material will
be absorbed into your bloodstream, causing your blood to have a higherthan-normal concentration of dissolved material. As that blood circulates
through your body, water will move from your body’s tissues into your
blood vessels, causing your tissues to lose water and dry out.
Fill in the blank with one of the choices: Based on the information above,
your tissues would begin to lose water and dry out when your blood has a
level of dissolved material
that of your body’s tissues.
greater than
less than
equivalent to
Answers and explanations start on page 700.

Lesson 5: Use Statistics and Probability
Key Ideas
A measure of central tendency is used to summarize data.
Probabilities are used to make predictions.
Combinations and permutations are used to calculate numbers of
ordered and unordered arrangements, respectively.

Because scientists often need to perform calculations, you will do some math
on the GED® Science Test. This math work will include the following:
Central tendency—average (mean), median, mode, and range
Independent and dependent probabilities
Counting techniques for combinations and permutations
You may want to review these topics on pages 288–291 and 296–305 of the
unit on Mathematical Reasoning. For some of these questions, you may have

access to an on-screen calculator. See pages 213, 216, and 224–227 of the
unit on Mathematical Reasoning to learn more about the on-screen calculator.
Scientists use measures of central tendency (mean, median, mode, and
range) to summarize many pieces of data with one number.

ON THE GED® TEST
When you need to compute on the GED® Science Test, a
calculator symbol with the word “Calculator” will appear on
the toolbar at the top of your screen. Click on it to open the
online calculator.
Use the graph below to answer a question about central tendency.

▶ Calculate the mean (arithmetic average) number of tornadoes that struck the
Goodland area per year in the years 2002 through 2005.
To find the mean of a set of quantities, sum the quantities and divide by the
number of items in the set. The list from 2002 to 2005 is 12, 22, 16, and 18.

The sum of those numbers is 68. Divide by the number of items in the list (4),
and the result is 17.
Scientists frequently use data to investigate the probability that an event will
happen. You may wish to review pages 296–299, Mathematical Reasoning,
to refresh your memory about working with probability.

Practice 5
Questions 1 through 4 are based on the following information.
Metabolism is a set of chemical processes that occur in the tissues of living
organisms. One example of a metabolic process in animals is the breaking
down of carbohydrates from food into substances the body can store. Another
example is the transformation of those same substances into energy that the
animal can use. The rate of metabolism describes the speed at which these
processes take place. Metabolic rate varies among different species. The
graph below compares several animal species by both average metabolic rate
and average body weight.

1. Of the species in this graph, which has the median body weight?

2. Of the species in this graph, which has the median metabolic rate?

3. Imagine that you could calculate the average (mean) of metabolic rates of
all the animal species in this graph. Now imagine that the shrew were
removed from the graph and that you recalculated the average of the
remaining species. Without the shrew, the new average metabolic rate
would be
.
higher than the previous average
lower than the previous average
about the same as the previous average
4. Adult elephants weigh more than adult horses. Based on the graph, what
would you predict would be true of elephants?
A. Their metabolic rate would resemble that of cactus mice, which, like
elephants, live in warm climates.
B. Their metabolic rate would be equivalent to that of horses.
C. Their metabolic rate would be slightly lower than that of horses.
D. Their metabolic rate would be significantly higher than that of horses.
5. Growing the same crop on a field year after year can cause crop yields to
decline as the soil becomes depleted and insect populations become firmly
established. Crop rotation, or growing different crops in different years, is
one way to avoid these problems. However, discovering the most effective
rotation of a number of different crops is difficult, because there are so
many possible orders in which to grow them and testing any given crop
rotation takes several years.
For example, imagine a proposed rotation of corn, peanuts, onions, beets,
and carrots, with a different crop grown each year for five years. How
many different orderings of these five crops are possible?
A. 15
B. 25
C. 120

D. 125
Answers and explanations begin on page 701.

Lesson 6: Apply Scientific Formulas
Key Ideas
Science formulas work much like math formulas and can be used to
find missing values.
Plug in any known values to the appropriate positions in the formula
to find the unknown or missing value.
Science formulas generally require defined units for each of the
values in the formula.

In science, formulas are used to convey symbolic information concisely. In
many ways, science formulas work the same way as math formulas, since
they are generally a way of expressing different values in relation to each
other and can be used to find an unknown value by plugging in the known
values.
Science formulas almost always require specific units, such as velocity, mass,
or force in physics, or volume, density, mass, or relative amounts of different
elements in chemistry.
For example, this formula commonly used in science relates density to mass
and volume:

Here, d represents density, m represents mass, and v represents volume. This
formula requires specific units for each of the three variables, such as grams
for mass and cubic centimeters for volume. Using these units will yield a
density value of grams per cubic centimeter. For example, if a substance has

a mass (m) of 10 grams and a volume (v) of 2 cubic centimeters, it’s possible
to calculate the density of the substance as:
5 grams per
cubic centimeter.
Furthermore, with a three-part formula, it’s possible to calculate any of the
three parts given the other two. For example, say you’re given the density
formula in the following form:

The formula provides the density and the mass, so you can determine the
missing value, volume, as you would for any three-part math equation.
Multiply both sides by v to yield 3v = 60 grams, then divide both sides by 3
to yield v = 20 cubic centimeters.
Use the density formula to answer the following question:
If a substance has a density of 15 grams per cubic centimeter, and the
volume of the substance is 50 cubic centimeters, what is its mass, in
grams?
To find the mass, fill the known values into the formula and then solve for m:

Practice 6
Questions 1 and 2 are based on the following information:
In chemistry, a chemical formula is a way of conveying information about the
ratios of atoms that make up a given chemical compound, generally by the
use of a single line of chemical element symbols (designated by letters) and
numbers. For example, CO2 is the formula for carbon dioxide; the symbols
stand for a single atom of carbon, C, combined with two atoms of oxygen, O.

(The subscript 2 indicates that there are 2 oxygen atoms.) This formula
indicates that every carbon dioxide molecule consists of one carbon atom and
two oxygen atoms.
Water is produced from hydrogen and oxygen. The formula below shows two
molecules of hydrogen (each of which contains two hydrogen atoms) and one
molecule of oxygen (which contains two oxygen atoms) combining to form
two molecules of water, H2O.
2H2 + O2 → 2H2O
1. How many total atoms of oxygen are in the two resulting water molecules
combined?
A. 0
B. 1
C. 2
D. 4
2. Given the following formula, which combines 10 hydrogen molecules and
5 oxygen molecules, fill in the missing coefficient to indicate the number
of water molecules produced by the reaction:
10H2 + 5O2 → __H2O
Questions 3 and 4 are based on the following information:
Physics uses a wide range of formulas, many of which convey basic
mathematical relationships. The formula below is used to calculate the kinetic
energy of an object in motion; Ek represents kinetic energy (measured in
joules, J), m represents mass (in kilograms), and v represents velocity (in
meters per second):

3. Given the kinetic energy formula

× 16 m2/s2, what is the

velocity, in meters per second?
A.
B. 4
C. 10
D. 16
4. If the velocity of the object in the above example were doubled while the
mass remained the same, the kinetic energy would
A. be half as great.
B. remain the same.
C. double.
D. be four times as great.

Science Practices Practice Questions
Questions 1 through 3 are based on the following passage.
The 1543 publication of Nicolaus Copernicus’s heliocentric, or sun-centered,
theory of the universe marked a crucial moment in the history of science.
Copernicus’s theory that the planets revolve around the sun was
controversial: at first, many refused to accept that Earth could be hurtling
through space. However, we now know that Copernicus’s theory was
accurate in many ways.
Despite its importance as a breakthrough, Copernicus’s theory contained a
number of ideas that today seem primitive. For example, Copernicus
maintained that the planets were embedded in crystalline spheres.
Additionally, while Copernicus developed the novel, and later widely
accepted, idea that Earth rotates on its axis, he also believed that the planets
orbit around the sun in perfect circles. We now know that the planets move in
elliptical orbits.
1. Which of the following is the main idea of the second paragraph?

A. Primitive astronomers accepted Copernicus’s theory when it was first
published.
B. While Copernicus’s theory was an important development, it included
elements that are outdated today.
C. Copernicus believed that Earth moved around the sun, rather than the
other way around.
D. Earth does not hurtle through space.
2. Which of the following would be an appropriate title for this passage?
A. “Important Landmarks in 16th-Century Science”
B. “Copernicus: The Life of an Astronomer”
C. “The Significance and Limitations of the Copernican Theory”
D. “The Earth-Centered Universe”
3. Which of the following can be inferred from the passage?
A. Astronomers now believe that the planets are not embedded in
crystalline spheres.
B. Astronomers now know that Earth does not move around the sun in an
ellipse.
C. All aspects of the Copernican theory have now been disproven.
D. Copernicus took inspiration from the primitive astronomers who came
before him.
4. Matter is generally found in one of three phases: solid, liquid, and gas. A
substance can be converted from a solid to a liquid and then from a liquid
to a gas by adding heat. Once the temperature of a solid substance reaches
its melting point, any heat added is used to change the solid to the liquid
phase. So, while the phase is changing, the temperature of the substance
remains constant. Once the phase change is complete, the temperature of
the liquid continues to rise. Similarly, once the temperature of a liquid
reaches the boiling point, any heat added is used to change the liquid to
the gas phase, and the temperature remains constant while the phase is
changing.

At which points are phase changes occurring in the graph above?
A. A and E
B. A, C, and E
C. B and D
D. C, D, and E
5. While all types of cancer share the common trait of uncontrolled cell
growth, the causes of that uncontrolled growth are complex and varied.
Nevertheless, a number of specific causes of several types of cancer are
known. For example, long-term asbestos exposure can result in
mesothelioma (a cancer that can affect multiple organs), while long-term
regular inhalation of tobacco smoke can lead to lung cancer. In addition to
such chemical causes, viruses are also responsible for a number of types
of cancer: human papillomavirus precipitates cervical cancer, while the
hepatitis B virus causes liver cancer.
Use the information above to place four specific types of cancer from the
list below into the left side of the table. Place a corresponding cause of
each, as identified in the passage above, into the cell immediately to its
right.

Questions 6 through 8 are based on the following paragraph and
graphic.
Record high temperatures were recorded in numerous Australian cities in the
summer of 2012. The chart below indicates current and former record
temperatures for seven of those cities. For instance, Hobart’s previous record
was a little below 41°C, and its current record is a little above 41°C.

6. According to the chart, which city experienced the largest increase from its
previous record to its current record?
A. Hobart
B. Penrith
C. Eucla
D. Leonora
7. Which of the following cities had a previous record equal to the median of
all the cities’ previous records?
A. Cape Naturaliste
B. Canberra
C. Penrith
D. Eucla
8. According to the chart, which of the following statements is true?
A. Temperatures will likely continue to increase.
B. Temperatures increased 5 degrees or less.
C. Temperatures increased more than 5 degrees.
D. Temperatures usually increase 2–5 degrees in the summer.
Questions 9 through 12 are based on the following passage.

An office manager noticed that each time she touched the metal filing cabinet
next to her desk, she experienced an electrostatic shock (commonly known as
“static”). Her assistant, however, only rarely experienced such shocks when
touching the cabinet. The office manager wondered why this might be.
The office manager developed a hypothesis: perhaps differences in clothing
could explain why she was experiencing more shocks than her assistant. The
office manager liked to wear nylon clothing, and her assistant usually wore
cotton clothing.
To test her hypothesis, the office manager convinced her assistant to wear
nylon clothing to work every day for a week, while she herself wore cotton
clothing. The next week, they switched: the office manager wore nylon
clothing, and the assistant wore cotton. To control for the possibility that the
differences in shocks were due to differences in their footwear, they wore
identical shoes each day. During the experiment, both the office manager and
her assistant recorded the number of times they touched the metal filing
cabinet each day, and they also recorded the number of times they
experienced electrostatic shocks when doing so.
At the end of the first week, they found that the assistant had experienced 73
electrostatic shocks, while the office manager had experienced 10. During the
second week, the office manager experienced 68 shocks, and her assistant 12.
The office manager concluded that these results supported her hypothesis,
and as a result she decided to switch to wearing mostly cotton clothing.
9. Scientific investigations begin with a question. Which of the following is
the question that formed the basis for the office manager’s experiment?
A. Is it better to wear cotton clothing or nylon clothing?
B. Why does touching the metal filing cabinet produce more electrostatic
shocks than touching other office furniture?
C. Why, when I touch the metal filing cabinet, do I experience more
electrostatic shocks than my assistant does when she touches it?
D. Could my shoes be causing me to experience more electrostatic shocks
than my assistant experiences?
10. Which of the following best summarizes how the office manager

conducted her experiment?
A. The office manager suspected that her nylon clothing was causing her
to experience electrostatic shocks.
B. The office manager switched to cotton clothing after seeing that her
hypothesis was supported by her data.
C. The office manager wore shoes of a different material than those of her
assistant.
D. The office manager wore one type of clothing, while her assistant wore
another type of clothing, and they recorded the number of shocks they
experienced.
11. Why did the office manager and her assistant wear the same type of shoes
while conducting the experiment?
A. They wanted to test the effect of their clothing on the number of
shocks they experienced, and wearing different types of shoes might
have confused their results.
B. They wanted to test whether the office manager’s shoes were causing
the high number of electrostatic shocks she was experiencing.
C. They believed that wearing cotton might cause the wearer to
experience more electrostatic shocks.
D. They wanted to protect themselves from the effects of electrostatic
shock.
12. Imagine that the results of the office manager’s experiment had
demonstrated that her clothing was not in fact responsible for the large
number of electrostatic shocks she was experiencing. After reviewing
those findings, the office manager then wondered if her footwear might be
responsible, and she decided to conduct a new experiment to test this idea.
Before she conducted that experiment, the idea that her shoes might be
responsible would be which of the following?
A. a new conclusion based on findings
B. a general principle from the study of physics
C. a new hypothesis
D. an experiment design

Directions: You MAY use your calculator to figure out the answers to
questions 13 and 14.
13. Common garden snails are hermaphroditic. That is, each individual snail
produces both sperm and eggs. Mating between two garden snails
involves the transfer of sperm from each partner to the other. A high
school science teacher has created a large terrarium for his classroom that
contains 6 adult garden snails. Assuming that all 6 snails are healthy, how
many different mating pairs are possible?
A. 2
B. 12
C. 15
D. 36
14. The sun is a class G star, which is a type of main-sequence star.
Approximately 90 percent of all stars in the Milky Way galaxy are mainsequence stars, and approximately 7 percent of all main-sequence stars are
class G stars. What is the probability that any given star in the Milky Way
galaxy is a class G star? Express your answer as a percentage:

15. The table below contains data observed in a group of 58-year-old
Swedish men. The study examined the relationship between tobacco use
and formations called plaques that build up on the walls of arteries, which
are blood vessels that carry blood from the heart to the body’s tissues. The
carotid and femoral arteries are two large and very important arteries.
Based on the table, more than 50% of the men in which group have
femoral plaques?
Average Characteristics of 58-Year-Old Swedish Men, by Smoking
Status
Never
Smokers
Cholesterol

Ex-Smokers

Current
Smokers

Total Cholesterol

5.98

6.11

5.90

HDL Cholesterol

1.31

1.28

1.21

LDL Cholesterol

4.08

4.09

3.95

None

62

55

53

Small

15

23

16

Large

23

22

31

None

80

54

45

Small

10

13

14

Large

10

33

41

Carotid plaques (%)

Femoral plaques (%)

Answers and explanations start on page 701.

CHAPTER 2

Life Science
Lesson 1: Cell Structures and Functions
Key Ideas
The basic unit of all living things is the cell, which carries out the life
functions, including movement, growth, and reproduction.
All cells have a cell membrane, cytoplasm, and genetic material.
Unlike an animal cell, a plant cell contains a cell wall—a structure
that gives the cell rigidity and shape.

All living things are made of cells, the basic unit of life. Some organisms,
like bacteria and protozoa, are unicellular—they consist of a single cell.
Others, like plants and animals, are multicellular, consisting of many different types of specialized cells. For example, humans have skin cells, blood
cells, and nerve cells, to name just a few. All cells carry out the basic life
functions: movement, growth, cell maintenance, reproduction, and the
manufacture of specialized substances.
Although cells differ widely in size and appearance, they all have basic

structures in common. All cells have a cell membrane, a structure that keeps
the cell’s contents separate from its external environment. The cell membrane
is selectively permeable, which means that it allows certain substances, such
as water, nutrients, and wastes, to pass between the cell’s interior and the
surrounding environment. Inside the cell membrane is the cytoplasm, a
watery, jellylike substance that can include other cell structures. Finally, all
cells have genetic material, which contains coded instructions for carrying
out the cell’s activities. In bacteria, the genetic material consists of a single
molecule suspended in the cytoplasm. Bacteria are called prokaryotes. In all
other cells, the genetic material is contained within a nucleus. Such cells are
called eukaryotic cells. All plant and animal cells are eukaryotic. A typical
plant cell is shown below. Note that a plant cell has a cell wall, which gives
the cell shape and rigidity, and an animal cell does not.

GED® TEST TIP
The title and labels of a diagram usually tell you the main idea
of the diagram. Here, the main idea is that plant cells have cell
structures with specialized functions.

Practice 1
Questions 1 through 3 are based on the information on page 518.
1. According to the diagram on page 518, the func-tion of the
to supply energy to the cell.

is

nucleus
ribosomes
mitochondrion
2. In addition to the cell wall, the water stored in a plant cell’s vacuole helps
give the plant firmness and shape. When a plant is not taking in enough
water from the soil through its roots, it uses up its stored water and its
vacuoles shrink. When the vacuoles shrink, the plant wilts.
Which of the following is a conclusion based on the paragraph above
rather than a given fact?
A. Cell walls help give a plant cell firmness and shape.
B. Vacuoles help give a plant cell firmness and shape.
C. Plants take in water from the soil through their roots.
D. Cell walls cannot maintain a plant’s shape and rigidity when the plant
lacks water.
3. A student is examining a cell using a microscope. She is able to identify
the cell membrane, cytoplasm, a small vacuole, and the nucleus, but she
does not see a cell wall or any chloroplasts. She concludes that the cell is a
eukaryotic cell.
Which of the following is evidence that her conclusion is correct?
A. the presence of a nucleus
B. the presence of cytoplasm
C. the absence of chloroplasts
D. the absence of a cell wall

4. Cells were first seen during the 1600s, when English scientist Robert
Hooke observed cork cell walls through a microscope that could magnify
a specimen a couple of hundred times its original size. In the 1800s, the
compound light microscope, which magnifies up to a thousand times, was
developed. Electron microscopes, which can magnify up to a million
times, were invented during the 1900s.
Which of the following best explains why our knowledge of cells has
grown with improvements in microscope technology?
A. Each time the microscope is improved, scientists can see cell structures
more clearly.
B. With the first microscopes, all cell structures were clearly visible.
C. Compound light microscopes can magnify cells up to a thousand times.
D. Robert Hooke’s microscope only allowed him to see the largest cell
structures.
5. Diffusion is a process by which particles move from an area of higher
concentration to an area of lower concentration. For example, oxygen
diffuses through the cell membrane of a unicellular pond organism from
the water, where there is lots of oxygen, into the cell, where there is less
oxygen. Eventually, the concentration of oxygen inside and outside the
unicellular organism is the same.
What would happen if the concentration of oxygen were greater in the
unicellular organism than in its watery environment?
A. Water would diffuse from the unicellular organism into the pond
water.
B. Oxygen would diffuse from the unicellular organism into the pond
water.
C. Oxygen would diffuse from the pond water into the unicellular
organism.
D. Diffusion of oxygen between the organism and the pond water would
stop entirely.
Answers and explanations start on page 703.

Lesson 2: Cell Processes and Energy
Key Ideas
In photosynthesis, plants use light energy to form glucose from
carbon dioxide and water. Oxygen is a by-product.
In cellular respiration, glucose is broken down in the presence of
oxygen to release energy. Carbon dioxide is a by-product.
These two processes help maintain oxygen and carbon dioxide levels
in the atmosphere.

All cells need energy to carry out the life functions, such as growth and
reproduction. Green plants, some algae, and some bacteria use energy from
sunlight to make food in a process called photosynthesis.
In photosynthesis, plants use sunlight to power chemical reactions that
convert carbon dioxide gas and water into oxygen and the simple sugar
glucose. In the first stage of photosynthesis, light energy is captured by
chloroplasts inside plant cells. Chloroplasts contain chlorophyll, a pigment
that gives plants their green color. Chlorophyll absorbs light energy for
photosynthesis. In the second stage, water (H2O) that the plant gets from the
soil and carbon dioxide (CO2) that the plant gets from the air undergo a
complex series of chemical reactions inside the chloroplasts. The products of
these reactions are oxygen (O2) and glucose (C6H12O6). Plant cells use the
energy that is stored in glucose to power cell processes. Photosynthesis can
be summarized in the chemical equation shown below:
light energy
6CO2 + 6H2O → C6H12O6 + 6O2
In words, this means that carbon dioxide plus water, in the presence of light
energy, yields glucose plus oxygen.

ON THE GED® TEST
About 40% of the questions on the Science Test are about life
science topics.
As a result of photosynthesis, energy is stored in sugars and other
carbohydrates in the plant. To meet their energy needs, other organisms eat
plants or eat organisms that eat plants. When energy is needed in a cell,
carbohydrates are broken down to release the energy in a process called
cellular respiration. In this process, oxygen from the air reacts with glucose
from food to yield carbon dioxide, water, and energy. Cellular respiration can
be summarized in the following chemical equation:
C6H12O6 + 6O2 → 6CO2 + 6H2O + energy
In words, this means that glucose plus oxygen yields carbon dioxide, water,
and energy.
If you examine the two equations, you will notice that the products of photosynthesis are the raw materials of cellular respiration, and the products of
cellular respiration are the raw materials of photosynthesis. These two processes are part of a cycle. Plants release oxygen, a waste product of
photosynthesis, into the atmosphere. Animals breathe in the oxygen and use it
in cellular respiration. They breathe out carbon dioxide, a waste product of
cellular respiration. The carbon dioxide is then used by plants in
photosynthesis, and the cycle repeats. Between them, photosynthesis and
cellular respiration help keep the amounts of oxygen and carbon dioxide in
the atmosphere fairly constant.

Practice 2
Questions 1 through 3 are based on the information on page 520.
1. Which of the following are the products of cellular respiration?
A. glucose and light energy

B. carbon dioxide and oxygen
C. glucose, oxygen, and energy
D. carbon dioxide, water, and energy
2. A horticulturist wants to grow large, healthy plants by maximizing the rate
of photosynthesis.
Which of the following actions would be most likely to get the results she
wants?
A. increasing the amount of light the plants receive each day
B. increasing the amount of oxygen the plants receive each day
C. decreasing the amount of oxygen the plants receive each day
D. decreasing the amount of carbon dioxide the plants receive each day
3. Carbon dioxide is one of the “greenhouse gases” that help keep Earth
warm by trapping radiated heat in the atmosphere. Global warming is
thought to be caused in part by increased amounts of carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere.
Which of the following would help reduce the level of carbon dioxide in
the atmosphere and thus perhaps slow the global warming trend?
A. increasing the population of domestic animals
B. increasing the number of green plants
C. increasing the harvest of trees
D. increasing the amount of glucose in our food
Questions 4 and 5 refer to the following information and diagram.
In most plants, photosynthesis takes place primarily in the palisade cells of
leaves.

4. Fill in the blank using one word from the diagram.
A(n) __________ is an opening in the lower surface of the leaf
through which gases such as carbon dioxide can pass.
5. Chloroplasts are structures found within some of the cells in a leaf. They
help in the process of photosynthesis. In the diagram, they are represented
by small gray spots on the cells.
Which of the following statements is supported by the information in the
diagram?
A. Palisade cells provide a means of transporting water through a plant.
B. Most of a leaf’s chloroplasts are found in its palisade cells.
C. The spongy cells are soft, like a sponge.
D. The epidermis blocks light from reaching the palisade cells.
Answers and explanations start on page 703.

Lesson 3: Human Body Systems
Key Ideas

The circulatory system moves blood around the body, delivering and
taking away substances.
The respiratory system brings oxygen into the body and gets rid of
carbon dioxide.
The digestive system breaks down food into nutrients that cells can
use.
The nervous system controls body activities.

There are four levels of organization in the human body: (1) cells, the
smallest unit of life; (2) tissues, groups of similar cells that perform a specific
function, such as muscle tissue; (3) organs, groups of tissues that perform a
function, such as the stomach; and (4) body systems, groups of organs
working together to perform a function, such as digestion. Human body
systems include the circulatory, respiratory, digestive, nervous, immune,
endocrine, reproductive, urinary, skeletal, and muscular systems.
The circulatory system, sometimes called the cardiovascular system,
consists of the heart and the blood vessels. Its main function is to move the
blood, which transports substances like oxygen and nutrients, throughout the
body. The major organ of the circulatory system is the heart, a muscle that
contracts to pump blood. Blood moves through the blood vessels from large
arteries, to smaller arteries, to capillaries, to small veins, to large veins, and
back to the heart. Through the thin walls of the capillaries, oxygen, nutrients,
and other substances pass from the blood into the body’s cells, and carbon
dioxide and other wastes pass from the cells into the blood.
The respiratory system consists of the nose, throat, trachea (windpipe), and
lungs. Its function is to take oxygen from the air into the body when we
inhale and to get rid of waste in the form of carbon dioxide when we exhale.
The trachea branches into two tubes called the bronchi, one of which goes
into each lung. The bronchi branch into smaller tubes called bronchioles,
each of which ends in an alveolus, a tiny spherical sac. Inside the capillaries
of the alveoli, oxygen diffuses into the blood and carbon dioxide diffuses out
of the blood.

ON THE GED® TEST
On the Science Test, you will have to answer questions that
require you to use information from both text and a graphic, as
in questions 4 and 5 on page 523.
The digestive system consists of the mouth, esophagus, stomach, small
intestine, and large intestine. Its function is to break down food into nutrients, which are used for cell processes including the production of energy,
and to get rid of digestive wastes. Digestion begins in the mouth, where the
teeth grind food into smaller pieces, and saliva begins to break it down
chemically. Food is pushed by muscular action down through the esophagus
into the stomach, where it is churned and further broken down by enzymes
and stomach acids. From the stomach it travels to the small intestine, where
most of the nutrients are absorbed into the blood through tiny capillaries in
the villi. What remains goes to the large intestine, which removes water,
leaving solid waste to be excreted through the rectum.
The nervous system consists of the brain, spinal cord, and nerves. Its function is to receive, process, and transmit information, controlling body
activities. The brain has three main parts: the cerebrum, which controls
functions such as thinking, seeing, and speaking; the cerebellum, which
coordinates movement and position; and the brainstem, which controls
breathing and heart rate. Information is transmitted to and from the brain
through the nerves, which are bundled in the spinal cord and branch out from
there into all parts of the body.

Practice 3
Questions 1 through 3 are based on the information on page 522.
1. Which human body system interacts with each cell of the body?
A. the circulatory system

B. the digestive system
C. the muscular system
D. the skeletal system
2. How are the alveoli in the lungs and the villi in the small intestine similar?
A. Both are structures located in the respiratory system.
B. Both are structures located in the digestive system.
C. Both are structures in which substances pass through capillary walls
into the blood.
D. Both are structures involved in coordination and movement.
3. In the 17th century, English physician William Harvey concluded that
blood in the veins flows toward the heart.
Which of the following facts helps support Harvey’s conclusion?
A. The heart pumps about 1,800 gallons of blood per day.
B. The heart has four chambers: two atria and two ventricles.
C. Large veins branch into smaller blood vessels called capillaries.
D. Veins have valves that allow blood to flow in one direction only.
Questions 4 and 5 refer to the following information and diagram.
The kidneys of the urinary system remove cellular wastes and excess water
from the blood. This material, called urine, is stored in the bladder until it is
excreted from the body.

4. On the diagram, circle the name(s) of the structure(s) through which urine
passes from the kidneys to the bladder.
5. A urologist is a doctor who specializes in disorders of the urinary system.
Which of the following patients is most likely to be treated by a urologist?
A. a patient with low levels of iron in her blood
B. a patient with a painful kidney stone
C. a patient with swollen veins in the anus, called hemorrhoids
D. a patient with chronic indigestion
Answers and explanations start on page 703.

Lesson 4: Health Issues
Key Ideas
Infections occur when the body is invaded by germs—
microorganisms that cause disease.
A healthy diet has the right nutrients—proteins, carbohydrates, fats,

vitamins, minerals, and water.
The abuse of drugs and other substances can cause physical changes
and interfere with a person’s daily functioning.

Health can be affected by infections, nutrition, and substance abuse.
An infection is the invasion of the body by germs—microorganisms that
cause disease. It is often characterized by fever and other symptoms. Germs
can enter the body through breaks in the skin (for example, tetanus), with air
(for example, influenza), in contaminated food and water (for example, food
poisoning), by contact with contaminated blood or saliva (for example,
rabies), or through sexual activity (for example, gonorrhea). Infections can be
grouped according to the type of microorganisms that cause them. The most
common germs are bacteria and viruses, although infections can also be
caused by fungi, protozoans, and worms.
The body has natural defenses against infection, such as the skin, the mucous
membranes in the nose, tears, and acid in the stomach. If germs get past these
defenses, the immune system produces antibodies that destroy the germs. In
developed nations, infectious diseases are less common than they used to be
because of better nutrition and living conditions, safer water and sewage
systems, immunization (which provides protection against specific
infectious diseases), and antibiotics, drugs that fight bacteria.

ON THE GED® TEST
Many of the questions on the GED® Science Test are in
multiple-choice format. For each question, you must pick the
one correct answer from the four options that are given.
Nutrients are substances that are needed for growth, normal functioning, and
maintenance of cells. The body does not produce nutrients; instead we get
them from the food we eat. The nutrients that humans need for good health
include proteins, carbohydrates (sugars and starches), fats, vitamins,

minerals, and water. In a well-balanced diet, people get enough nutrients to
provide energy as well as the right nutrients needed for all the body’s
functions. Too much or too little of a nutrient can cause problems. For
example, a diet with too much fat can lead to obesity and contribute to heart
disease. Too little vitamin C can cause scurvy, a painful disease.
Drugs are substances that affect the structure or function of the body. They
are usually used to treat disease or relieve its symptoms, although some
drugs, like nicotine in tobacco, have no medicinal purpose. The nonmedical
use of a drug to the point that it interferes with a person’s normal functioning
is called drug abuse, or substance abuse. Drug abuse can lead to addiction, a
severe form of dependence that causes physical changes in the body so that
when the drug wears off or is stopped, withdrawal symptoms such as nausea
and pain occur. Heroin, speed, alcohol, nicotine, and barbiturates are
frequently abused addictive drugs. A milder form of dependence than
addiction is psychological dependence, or habituation. In this type of
dependence, the urge to take the drug is strong, even though there are no
withdrawal symptoms. Examples of drugs that can cause habituation in
humans are marijuana and hallucinogens. People also abuse substances that
are not drugs, like glue, gasoline, and aerosols. Most of these substances are
inhalants—they are sniffed for their effect on the nervous system. Inhalants
generally depress, or slow, the functioning of the nervous system, sometimes
causing their users to lose control or become unconscious.

Practice 4
Questions 1 and 2 are based on the informationon page 524.
1. Which of the following is among the body’s first barriers against germs?
A. the immune system
B. antibiotics
C. antibodies
D. the skin
2. Each evening, Sara has a glass of wine. If there is no wine in the house,

she feels a strong urge to get some, although she feels no ill effects if she
does not.
What is Sara’s relationship to alcohol?
A. addiction
B. physical dependence
C. habituation
D. withdrawal
Questions 3 and 4 are based on the following table.
Nutrients in the Diet
Nutrient

Description

Function

Source

Proteins

Complex
molecules (amino
acids) made of
oxygen, carbon,
nitrogen,
hydrogen

Growth and
maintenance of
cells and
metabolism

Meat, fish, eggs,
dairy products,
legumes, nuts,
seeds

Carbohydrates

Molecules
containing
oxygen, carbon,
and hydrogen

Body’s main
energy source,
providing 4
calories of energy
per gram;
roughage for
digestion

Bread, pasta,
cereal, rice,
fruits, potatoes

Fats

Fatty acids
containing
oxygen, carbon,
and hydrogen

Concentrated
source of energy,
providing 9
calories of energy
per gram;
insulation; cell
maintenance

Fish oils,
vegetable oils,
and animal fats

Vitamins

Substances used

Growth

Various foods,

in very small
quantities that are
vital for body
chemistry

maintenance,
repair of cells;
protein synthesis;
metabolism; and
other functions

daylight on skin
(vitamin D),
microorganisms
in the bowel
(vitamin K)

Minerals

Substances, such
as iron and
calcium,
necessary for
normal
development

Many functions,
including making
red blood cells
and building
strong bones

Various foods

Water

A liquid made of
oxygen and
hydrogen atoms

Involved in almost Beverages,
all body processes soups, foods

3. Which of the following statements is supported by the information in the
table?
A. Fats are a more concentrated source of energy than carbohydrates.
B. Vitamins are more important in the diet than minerals.
C. A good source of vitamin C is citrus fruits.
D. Minerals provide a low-fat source of energy.
4. Which of the following is a fact, rather than an opinion, based on the
table?
A. Eating meat is the best way to get sufficient protein in your diet.
B. Carbohydrates come from fruits as well as from bread and rice.
C. Iron is the only mineral you need.
D. Everyone should drink eight glasses of water each day.
Answers and explanations start on page 703.

Lesson 5: Reproduction and Heredity

Key Ideas
In asexual reproduction, an offspring is identical to its parent; in
sexual reproduction, an offspring is unique, inheriting traits from
each parent.
Gregor Mendel was the first to observe patterns of trait inheritance.
Traits are controlled by genes, which come in forms called alleles. A
dominant allele hides a recessive allele.

All species of organisms reproduce in some way. There are two types of
reproduction. In asexual reproduction, an individual organism produces
offspring identical to the parent. For example, in a type of asexual
reproduction called budding, a tiny freshwater animal called a hydra grows
buds that develop into offspring. In sexual reproduction, two sex cells
combine to form unique offspring with characteristics from both parent cells.
In humans and many other species, those specialized sex cells are called
sperm and ova.
Physical characteristics of organisms are called traits. The passing of traits
from parents to offspring in sexual reproduction is called heredity. The first
person to study heredity in a systematic way was an Austrian monk, Gregor
Mendel (1822–1884). He bred plants and observed that sometimes offspring
plants had the same traits as the parents and sometimes they did not. Mendel
experimented with purebred pea plants—plants that always produced
offspring with the same form of a trait as the parent. For example, purebred
short plants always produced short offspring. First he crossed purebred short
plants with purebred tall plants. In the first generation of offspring, all the
plants were tall—the shortness trait had vanished. When the first-generation
offspring reproduced, about three-quarters of the next generation of plants
were tall, and one-quarter were short. The shortness trait had reappeared.

GED® TEST TIP

As you take the test, pace yourself. If you are unsure of an
answer, do your best and mark “Flag for Review ” at the top of
your computer screen. At the end of the test, you may have time
to review these “flagged” questions.
Mendel repeated his pea plant experiments with other traits over a ten-year
period. Eventually he concluded that individual factors from each parent
plant control the inheritance of specific traits. An offspring plant inherited
one factor from the female parent and one from the male parent. Mendel
concluded that one factor in a pair can hide the other factor. For example, the
tallness factor hid the shortness factor in the first generation of offspring.
The factors that control traits are called genes. Different forms of a gene are
called alleles. The gene that controls pea plant height, for example, has one
allele for tallness and one allele for shortness. Each pea plant inherits one
allele for the height gene from each parent. Therefore, any particular pea
plant may have (1) two alleles for tallness, (2) two alleles for shortness, or (3)
one allele for shortness and one for tallness. In the third case, the dominant
allele, the tallness allele, controls the appearance of the trait. The recessive
allele, the shortness allele, is hidden. For a recessive trait to appear in an
individual, the individual must inherit two recessive alleles.
In Mendel’s original experiment, the parent plants were purebred tall and
purebred short. Thus, one parent had two dominant alleles for tallness, and
the other parent had two recessive alleles for shortness. All the offspring in
the first generation were hybrid—each had one allele for tallness and one for
shortness. Because the tallness allele is dominant, all of the first generation
plants were tall. In the next generation, some plants inherited two dominant
alleles, some inherited two recessive alleles, and some inherited one
dominant and one recessive allele, producing a mix of plants.

Practice 5
Questions 1 through 3 refer to the following paragraph and diagram.

The Punnett square below shows all the possible combinations of alleles
for height in offspring pea plants when two tall hybrid pea plants are crossed.
A capital T represents the dominant tallness allele, and a lowercase t, the
recessive shortness allele. One parent’s alleles are shown along the top of the
square; the other’s are shown on the left side. The genotypes of the offspring
are shown in the boxes.

1. The parent pea plants are both

.

tall
short
of medium height
2. What chance is there that an offspring will be short?
A. 0 out of 4
B. 1 out of 4
C. 2 out of 4
D. 3 out of 4
3. If you wanted to grow only tall pea plants in your garden over several
growing seasons, which of the following genotypes would give you the
best results?
A. tt
B. Tt
C. tT
D. TT
4. Fill in the blank with a numeral.

According to the passage on page 526, in order to show a recessive trait, an
organism must inherit __________ recessive alleles for that trait.
5. Why are organisms that reproduce sexually more genetically diverse than
organisms that reproduce asexually?
A. Organisms that reproduce sexually tend to produce more offspring than
those that reproduce asexually.
B. Organisms that reproduce sexually produce offspring that inherit
diverse traits from only one parent.
C. Organisms that reproduce sexually produce offspring with entirely new
traits unlike those of either parent.
D. Organisms that reproduce sexually produce offspring that have
inherited a mix of traits from their parents.
6. A student is trying to repeat Mendel’s experiments using the trait of fur
color in rabbits. Black fur is dominant, and white fur is recessive. She
starts with what she assumes is a purebred white female rabbit and a
purebred black male rabbit. She crosses them and is surprised when one of
the offspring has white fur.
What probably was wrong with the student’s experiment?
A. The white female was actually a hybrid.
B. The black male was actually a hybrid.
C. Most of the offspring were hybrids.
D. Most of the offspring were purebred.
Answers and explanations start on page 703.

Lesson 6: Modern Genetics
Key Ideas
Chromosomes are structures in a cell’s nucleus that are composed

mostly of genes, which are located on long molecules of DNA.
DNA contains the genetic code for making proteins in the cell.
Knowledge of genetics has led to advances in many fields but
especially in medicine.

Years after Mendel died, scientists identified chromosomes, rod-shaped
structures in the nucleus of each cell, as responsible for carrying genes from
parent organisms to their offspring. Reproductive cells have half the number
of chromosomes of an organism’s other cells. When a sperm cell and an
ovum unite, the resulting offspring has a full set of chromosomes. For
example, human sex cells have 23 chromosomes and our other cells have 46.

One chromosome can contain thousands of genes on a single long molecule
of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). A DNA molecule is shaped like a spiral
ladder. The sides of the ladder are made of deoxyribose—a sugar—and
phosphate. Each rung of the ladder is made of a pair of nitrogen bases. There
are four of these bases: adenine (A), guanine (G), thymine (T), and cytosine
(C). The four bases pair up in a specific way: A always pairs with T, and C
always pairs with G.

ON THE GED® TEST

Some questions on the GED® Test are based entirely on a
graphic. Read the title of the diagram, chart, or graph to make
sure you understand its main idea before you answer questions
based on it.
DNA controls the cell’s production of proteins, which help determine all the
characteristics and processes of the organism. During protein synthesis, the
information from a gene in the cell’s nucleus is used to produce a protein on
ribosomes in the cytoplasm. Messenger ribonucleic acid (RNA), transmits
the code from the DNA. Each set of three base pairs on the messenger RNA,
called a codon, contains instructions for creating an amino acid—a protein
building block. The sequence of codons determines the sequence of amino
acids in the protein and thus the specific protein to be made. So, the order of
bases on the gene forms a genetic code for the synthesis of a particular
protein.
There have been many recent advances in genetics, some controversial. Dolly
the sheep and other animals have been cloned from single cells. Cloning
bypasses sexual reproduction, raising the possibility that one day humans will
be cloned—an idea that many find unethical. Through genetic engineering,
the DNA of one organism can be introduced into the DNA of another
organism, changing the second organism’s traits. Genetic engineering has
been used to produce medicines, such as insulin. It has been more
controversial when used to improve foods. Finally, the entire human
genome, or genetic code, has been decoded, making possible many advances
in medicine. Scientists have identified genes involved in genetic disorders
such as cystic fibrosis. They have also identified genes that predispose people
to diseases such as breast cancer and Alzheimer’s disease. Through genetic
testing, people can find out whether they have any of these disease-related
genes. In some cases, they can take steps to prevent the disease or to seek
early treatment. In recent years, scientists have also succeeded in correcting
certain genetic disorders through gene therapy.

Practice 6

Questions 1 and 2 are based on the information on page 528.
1. Which of the following provides the code needed for a cell to make
proteins?
A. the number of chromosomes in the cell
B. the amino acids in the cytoplasm
C. the sequence of base pairs in a gene
D. the pairing of adenine with thymine
2. A mutation is any change in the DNA of a gene. Which of the following is
the most likely result of a mutation?
A. the loss of one or more chromosomes
B. an extra chromosome
C. too much RNA in the cytoplasm
D. a change in protein synthesis
3. Some animals have been genetically engineered to grow larger. Plants
have been engineered to resist diseases or insects. Some fruits have been
engineered to ripen more slowly. Genetic engineering of domesticated
plants and animals is controversial. According to some people, these foods
pose a risk because their effects on consumers and the environment are
unknown. Others claim that genetically engineered foods are safe.
Which of the following statements is an opinion about genetic engineering
rather than a fact?
A. Scientists have used genetic engineering to produce animals that grow
larger.
B. Disease-resistant plants have been produced by genetic engineering.
C. Some genetically engineered fruit takes longer to ripen than its
unaltered counterpart.
D. Genetically engineered foods are safe for consumers and the
environment.
4. When a cell reproduces through cell division, scientists call the

reproducing cell the parent cell, and the two cells that result from the
division are called daughter cells. The daughter cells are genetically
identical to the parent cells. Before a parent cell starts to divide, the DNA
in its nucleus replicates, or makes a complete copy of itself.
Why is this process necessary?
A. so that the parent cell will have an extra copy of DNA
B. so that each daughter cell receives a complete set of DNA
C. so that each daughter cell will not need to synthesize proteins
D. so that each daughter cell will receive half its DNA from each parent
cell
5. Which of the following statements is supported by the diagram and the
passage on page 528?
A. The DNA molecule unzips between the sugar and phosphate segments.
B. The base guanine pairs only with the base cytosine.
C. In a sequence of DNA bases, guanine always comes before adenine.
D. About 10 percent of DNA contains genes; the remainder is “junk”
DNA.
6. According to the passage on page 528, proteins, which perform a variety
of functions, are built from chains of
.
amino acids
RNA
codons
enzymes
Answers and explanations start on page 704.

Lesson 7: Evolution and Natural Selection
Key Ideas

Charles Darwin’s observations in the Galápagos Islands led him to
formulate the theory of evolution.
Adaptations are traits that help an organism survive in its
environment.
Natural selection is the process by which individuals with favorable
variations survive, reproduce, and pass the variations to their
offspring.

In 1831, the British ship the Beagle set sail with naturalist Charles Darwin
(1809–1882) aboard. Darwin’s job was to observe living things he
encountered. His observations during this five-year trip around the world led
him to formulate an important scientific theory, the theory of evolution.
One of the Beagle’s stops was the Galápagos Islands, a group of islands in
the Pacific Ocean off the South American coast. There Darwin saw great
diversity of life forms. He noticed that many of the plants and animals
resembled those he had seen on the South American mainland. However,
there were also important differences between mainland and island
organisms. For example, the iguanas on the mainland had small claws that
allowed them to climb trees to eat leaves. On the Galápagos, iguanas had
large claws that allowed them to grip wet, slippery rocks and eat seaweed. As
Darwin traveled among the Galápagos Islands, he also observed that similar
species of organisms sometimes differed from island to island. For example,
small birds called ground finches had strong, wide beaks well-suited for
breaking and eating seeds. However, different species of ground finches had
different sized beaks, depending on which island they lived on. The sizes of
the iguanas’ claws and the birds’ beaks are examples of adaptations, traits
that help an organism survive in its environment. From these observations,
Darwin concluded that organisms had originally come from the mainland and
had changed, or evolved, over many generations to become better adapted to
their new island environments.

ON THE GED® TEST

The GED® Science Test will not test memorized definitions of
terms such as “adaptation” and “natural selection.” However,
you could be asked a question about the meaning of a term in
the context of a science passage.
Darwin explained that species evolve because of natural selection. By this
process, individuals that are better adapted to their environments are more
likely to survive and reproduce, passing their favorable adaptations to their
offspring. Several factors are involved in natural selection:
1. Most species produce far more offspring than can survive.
2. These offspring compete with one another for scarce resources in their
environment.
3. Members of a species have different traits, called variations. Some
variations make individuals better adapted to survive in their
environment.
4. Individuals with favorable variations are more likely to survive,
reproduce, and pass the favorable traits to their offspring.
5. Over generations, helpful variations spread through a species, causing the
species to change, or evolve.
Evolution through natural selection explains how species change over time.
But how do new species evolve? Geographic isolation seems to play a big
role in the evolution of new species. When a group of individuals remains
separated from the rest of its species long enough, it may become a new
species. This means that members of the new species will be unable to
interbreed with members of the original species. For example, there are 13
species of finches on the various Galápagos Islands. They all probably
evolved from a single ancestral species.

Practice 7
Questions 1 and 2 refer to the following paragraph and diagram.
The forelimbs of humans, penguins, birds that fly, and alligators are similar.

The similar pattern of the bones is evidence that these animals evolved from a
common ancestor. Similar structures that organisms have inherited from a
common ancestor are called homologous structures.

1. The forelimbs of frogs are homologous to those of human arms, penguins’
flippers, birds’ wings, and alligators’ legs. Based on the diagram and
paragraph, which of the following is likely to be true of frogs’ forelimbs?
A. Frogs use their forelimbs for swimming.
B. Frogs’ forelimbs contain carpal bones.
C. Frogs’ forelimbs resemble wings more than they resemble human
arms.
D. Frogs are more closely related to humans than they are to alligators.
2. Which of the following statements is supported by the paragraph and the
diagram?
A. The tip of a bird’s wing is homologous to the upper arm of a human.
B. Penguins are more closely related to humans than they are to birds.
C. In penguins, flying birds, humans, and alligators, the forelimbs have
similar structures despite performing different functions.
D. Homologous structures have similar functions in modern organisms
but had different functions in modern organisms’ ancestors.

3. What are adaptations, according to the passage on page 530?
A. traits that make an organism better able to survive in its environment
B. traits that all members of a species possess
C. traits that are learned and not inherited
D. traits that appear only when two recessive alleles are inherited
4. The more similar the DNA of two species, the more closely related they
are. Scientists have used modern DNA analysis to trace the evolutionary
relationships among Darwin’s 13 species of finches. DNA analysis
revealed that the finch species all had very similar DNA. Thus, Darwin
was correct when he proposed that they had evolved from a common
ancestor.
Which of the following best explains why DNA analysis provides better
evidence to support the hypothesis that Darwin’s finches evolved from a
common ancestor than the scientific methods that Darwin used?
A. DNA analysis takes less time than observation.
B. DNA analysis is easier to do than observing birds in the wild.
C. DNA analysis provides more objective data than observation does.
D. Technological methods of obtaining evidence are inferior to
observation.
Answers and explanations start on page 704.

Lesson 8: Organization of Ecosystems
Key Ideas
An ecosystem is a community of organisms and their physical
environment.
Energy passes through an ecosystem from the sun, to producers
(green plants), to consumers.
Carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, and water cycle through the biosphere

from the living to the nonliving components and back again.

An ecosystem is an area consisting of a community of organisms—plants,
animals, fungi, bacteria—and the physical environment in which they live—
soil, air, water, and climate. Earth as a whole is an enormous ecosystem
called the biosphere. Smaller ecosystems include meadows, ponds, wetlands,
and tidal zones. A healthy ecosystem contains a diversity of organisms. Some
of the organisms, such as green plants, are called producers because they use
energy from the sun to make their own food through photosynthesis. Other
organisms, called consumers, depend on producers to meet their energy
needs. These organisms eat plants, or eat organisms that eat plants, to get
energy. The complex pattern in which energy passes through an ecosystem is
called a food web. A simple food web for a wooded area is shown here.

ON THE GED® TEST
On the GED® Science Test, you may see diagrams, like the
one on this page, which contain arrows. Follow the directions
of the arrows to understand the process.

Carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, and water also cycle through ecosystems from the
living to the nonliving components and back again. As discussed in Lesson 2,
carbon and oxygen cycle through the biosphere as a result of photosynthesis
and cellular respiration. Nitrogen cycles between the land, organisms, and the
air through chemical processes. Water cycles between the oceans and other
surface water, the air, land, and organisms through evaporation,
condensation, precipitation, and transpiration from plants.

Practice 8
1. According to the passage, what is the ultimate source of energy for the
food web on page 532?
A. green plants
B. mammals

C. soil, air, and water
D. the sun
2. Suppose most of the foxes in the woodland ecosystem on page 532 were
hunted and killed. Which of the following is most likely to happen as a
result?
A. The amount of plant life in the woodland would increase.
B. The populations of hares and seed-eating birds would increase.
C. The populations of insects and insect-eating birds would decrease.
D. The population of snakes would decrease.
3. Which of the following is most similar to a naturally occurring ecosystem?
A. a diorama with dried vegetation and stuffed animals
B. an aquarium with aquatic plants and herbivorous tropical fish
C. a house with central air conditioning and heating
D. a supermarket with a large section of fresh fruits and vegetables
4. In most cases, changes in one aspect of an ecosystem result in reactions in
other parts of the ecosystem, restoring balance. In some cases, however,
changes can be so great that the original ecosystem is replaced with
another. When this occurs naturally, as when grasses are replaced by taller
plants, shrubs, and eventually trees, it is called succession.
Which of the following statements is supported by the information above?
A. When changes are introduced into an ecosystem, its balance is
permanently disrupted.
B. Succession is usually caused by human destruction of an ecosystem.
C. The intentional replacement of a wooded area by a field of cultivated
wheat is an example of succession.
D. The natural replacement of lichens by mosses and ferns, and then
shrubs, is an example of succession.
5. Although more than three-quarters of the atmosphere is nitrogen,
atmospheric nitrogen cannot be used directly by plants and animals.

Instead, certain bacteria and blue-green algae take nitrogen from the air
and, through a process called nitrogen fixation, turn it into compounds that
plants can use. Nitrogen-fixing bacteria are found in the roots of some
plants such as peas and beans. When these plants are present, the nitrate
content of the soil is increased. Nitrates are absorbed by plants, which are
eaten by consumers. Eventually the nitrogen returns to the soil in
excrement and when organisms die.
What is the role of nitrogen-fixing bacteria in the nitrogen cycle?
A. to decompose dead plants and animals
B. to add nitrogen to the atmosphere
C. to turn atmospheric nitrogen into compounds plants and animals can
use
D. to take nitrogen from blue-green algae and turn it into compounds
plants can use
Answers and explanations start on page 704.

Life Science Practice Questions
1. Cell membranes are selectively permeable, allowing some substances to
pass through and blocking others. The movement through the cell
membrane takes place by means of passive or active transport. In passive
transport, materials like water move through the cell’s membrane without
using any of the cell’s energy. Active transport is the movement of
materials in the cell from areas of low concentration to areas of high
concentration. In active transport, the cell uses energy to move substances
in and out. For example, transport proteins use energy when they carry
molecules into and out of the cell.
What is the main difference between passive transport and active
transport?
A. Active transport involves the passage of water, and passive transport
does not.

B. Active transport requires the cell to use energy, and passive transport
does not.
C. Active transport is used by animal cells, and passive transport is used
by plant cells.
D. Active transport takes substances out of the cell, and passive transport
brings them in.
2. Ben set up an experiment to prove that ivy plants take in water through
their roots. He took a jar, put an ivy plant in the open jar, and filled the jar
with water to cover only the roots of the ivy. After a week, he checked the
water level in the jar and found it had gone down. Ben concluded that the
plant had absorbed water through its roots.
Why does Ben have insufficient proof for his conclusion?
A. Ben should have put more ivy plants in the open jar.
B. Ben should have put several plants of different species in the open jar.
C. The water level in the jar might have gone down because of
evaporation.
D. There should have been soil in the jar rather than water.
Questions 3 and 4 refer to the following information and diagram.
A pedigree shows the pattern of inheritance of a trait in a family. In a
pedigree, circles represent females; squares represent males. A completely
shaded shape indicates that the person has the trait. A half-shaded shape
indicates the person carries the recessive form of the gene for the trait but
does not have the trait. An unshaded shape indicates the person neither has
nor carries the trait. In the following pedigree, Megan is a carrier of the
genetic disorder cystic fibrosis, although she is healthy.

3. In the diagram above, one of Cailin’s grandfathers is a carrier of cystic
fibrosis. Circle that individual on the diagram.
4. Which of the following best explains why Megan’s and Will’s families
were surprised to learn Cailin had inherited cystic fibrosis?
A. Megan and Will are carriers of cystic fibrosis.
B. Some of Will’s distant ancestors had cystic fibrosis.
C. Megan’s father and Will’s mother are carriers of cystic fibrosis.
D. No one in either Megan’s or Will’s immediate family has cystic
fibrosis except Cailin.
Questions 5 through 7 refer to the following paragraph and diagram.
Mitosis is a type of cell division in which the two daughter cells that are
formed have the same genetic material as the parent cell. Before mitosis
starts, each chromosome in the nucleus duplicates itself to produce two
sections, called chromatids, which are linked. Those chromatids then split, so
that each daughter cell has DNA identical to that of the parent cell and to that
of the other daughter cell. The function of the spindle fiber in mitosis is to
control the movement of chromatids during mitosis. During the metaphase,
for example, the spindle fiber helps to align the chromatids in a line across
the middle of the cell so that the chromatids can divide evenly during
anaphase. The spindle fibers then direct the movement of the chromatids after
they split, ensuring that each daughter cell has a full set of identical
chromatids.

5. During which stage do the chromosomes line up across the middle of the
cell?
A. early prophase
B. metaphase
C. telophase
D. interphase
6. Which of the following is true based on the paragraph and diagram?
A. After mitosis, one of the resulting daughter cells is larger than the other
one.
B. After mitosis, the two daughter cells have their own nuclei.
C. The first stage of mitosis is the division of the cell into two separate
cells.
D. The first stage of mitosis involves the formation of cytoplasm.
7. Suppose that after mitosis, one daughter cell has more chromosomes than
the parent cell, while the other daughter cell has fewer. Which of the
following best explains this occurrence?
A. At least one pair of chromatids failed to split during anaphase.
B. The chromatids did not divide evenly in prophase.
C. The chromosomes did not duplicate in early prophase.
D. The chromosomes duplicated themselves to produce three sections in

interphase.
8. Charles Darwin thought that evolution took place gradually, with tiny
changes eventually adding up to major change in a species. If this view is
right, then there should be fossils, remains of long-dead organisms, that
show the intermediate stages of evolution in a species. However, the fossil
record often shows no intermediate forms for long periods of time.
Instead, fossils of a species appear to suddenly become distinctly
different. To account for this, some modern scientists have hypothesized
that species evolve during short periods of rapid, major change, separated
by long periods of relative stability.
Which of the following hypotheses may also explain why evolutionary
change sometimes seems to occur rapidly and dramatically?
A. Organisms with soft tissues may form fossils.
B. Fossils usually form in layers of sedimentary rock.
C. The fossil record for any given species may be incomplete.
D. Fossils do not provide evidence for evolution.
9. Blood consists of blood cells and proteins suspended in a yellowish liquid
called plasma. Red blood cells carry oxygen to the body. White blood
cells protect the body against infection. Plasma transports nutrients and
hormones to the body’s cells and removes waste.
Which answer choice below describes some of the main functions of
blood?
A. energy production and movement
B. movement and cell repair
C. cell repair and respiration
D. nutrient transport and immune defense
Questions 10 and 11 refer to the following diagram.

10. Which material covers the tooth’s top surface?
A. enamel
B. nerve fibers
C. blood vessels
D. periodontal fibers
11. Tooth decay can eat away at the structure of a tooth. Tooth decay begins
at the surface, but it must reach the pulp, which contains many nerve
endings, before it will cause extreme pain. That suggests that the dentin
contains
.
few or no nerve endings
many nerve endings
more minerals than the enamel
12. The carrying capacity of an ecosystem is the maximum number of
organisms it can support. If the carrying capacity is exceeded, there will
not be enough resources, and one or more species will decline until a
balance of organisms and resources is reached.
Which of the following is an example of people overloading the carrying
capacity of an ecosystem?

A. using a park for recreation
B. grazing too many cattle on grassland
C. adding a room to a suburban house
D. banning shellfishing in polluted waters
13. Classification is the grouping of organisms based on similarities in their
traits and their evolutionary histories. In the past, scientists classified
organisms based primarily on a visual analysis of their structures and on
the fossil record. Today, DNA analysis of selected genes is overturning
many traditional classifications. For example, it was thought that sperm
whales and dolphins, both of which have teeth, were closely related.
However, DNA analysis revealed that sperm whales are actually more
closely related to baleen whales, which do not have teeth.
What is the reason that DNA analysis has led to changes in the
classification of organisms?
A. DNA analysis provides more fundamental, accurate data than does a
visual analysis of structures and fossils.
B. Traditional classification was based on the erroneous assumption that
organisms could be grouped by similarities.
C. When organisms possess similar structures, it always means that they
are closely related.
D. When data from DNA analysis conflict with data from structural
analysis, usually the structural data are correct.
14. Homeothermy refers to the maintenance of a constant body temperature
in warm-blooded animals, such as dogs and human beings. Warm-blooded
animals have specific body processes to help them gain or lose heat. For
example, sweating helps cool the body through the evaporation of water,
and shivering helps generate heat in cold environments.
Which of the following is most likely an example of a homeothermic
process in dogs?
A. panting
B. healing after a wound

C. reproduction
D. grooming
Questions 15 through 17 refer to the following graph.

15. Provide a numerical response
How many of the five causes of death depicted in the graph produced more
deaths in 2011 than in 2005? __________
16. Compare the number of deaths from heart disease in 2005 to the number
of deaths from heart disease in 2011. That difference represents the
of all the causes of death depicted in the graph.
biggest increase
biggest decrease
smallest increase
17. Which of the following approximately expresses the percentage change
in deaths from heart diseases from 2005 to 2011? You May use your
calculator.
A. 8% increase
B. 8% decrease
C. 92% increase
D. 92% decrease

Answers and explanations start on page 705.

CHAPTER 3

Earth and Space Science
Lesson 1: Structure of Earth

Earth is almost spherical, flattened at the poles, and bulging at the equator. It
is composed of three main layers: the crust, the mantle, and the core. Earth’s
outer layer, its solid crust, is made of granite, basalt, gabbro, and other types
of rock. Under the oceans, the crust is 3 to 6.8 miles thick; under the
continents, the crust is from 12 to 40 miles thick. Below the crust is the
molten mantle; it consists of silica and metal-rich minerals. The core has two

layers: the outer core, which is mostly liquid iron, and the inner core, which
is mostly solid iron. Extreme heat and pressure characterize the core.

Key Ideas
Earth is made up of three main layers: the crust, mantle, and core.
The theory of plate tectonics explains how the seafloor spreads, how
major landforms are created, and how the continents move.
At the margins between plates, plates move away from or toward
each other, or they slide past each other.

The theory of plate tectonics explains phenomena of Earth’s crust: seafloor
spreading, the formation of major landforms, and the movement of
continents. According to this theory, Earth’s crust is made up of tectonic
plates that fit together like a crude jigsaw puzzle. These plates move relative
to one another at a rate of up to 15 centimeters (6 inches) a year. At the
boundaries between plates, major landforms such as mountain ranges,
volcanoes, ocean trenches, and mid-ocean ridges form, and earthquakes
occur. There are three types of plate boundaries, or margins.

GED® TEST TIP
When you read a multiple-choice question, try to answer it
before you read the choices. If one of the choices is similar to
your answer, it is probably correct.
At a constructive margin, two plates are moving apart and new crust is
forming. Molten material from the mantle below wells up in the space
between the plates, hardens, and forms new crust, usually at a midocean ridge. For example, at the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, new crust is
forming, causing the seafloor to spread and grow by about 5 centimeters
(2 inches) a year.
At a destructive margin, two plates are colliding and crust is being

destroyed. When a continental plate collides with an oceanic plate, the
denser oceanic crust may be forced under the other plate, forming a
deep trench. When two plates consisting of continental crust collide, the
crust crumples to form mountain ranges such as the Andes.
At a transform, or conservative, margin, two plates are sliding by one
another, and no crust is created or destroyed. For example, the San
Andreas fault in California is the boundary between the North American
plate and the Pacific plate, which is sliding northwest, causing many
earthquakes.
As the plates move, they carry the continents with them. Scientists believe
that a single large continent, Pangaea, existed about 250 million years ago. It
gradually broke apart, and over millions of years the pieces (which are
today’s continents) drifted into the locations they are in today.

Practice 1
Use the information on page 538 to answer the following questions.
1. What does the theory of plate tectonics explain?
A. changes in Earth’s crust
B. changes in Earth’s mantle
C. changes in the composition of Earth’s layers
D. why there is extreme heat and pressure in Earth’s core
2. Fill in the blanks with the options below. One similarity between Earth’s
inner and outer cores is that both (1)
, although the two are
different because the inner core (2)
while the outer core (3)
.
Select (1)

Select (2)

consist primarily of iron

is mostly gaseous is mostly gaseous

consist primarily of granite is mostly liquid

Select (3)
is mostly liquid

consist primarily of silica

is mostly solid

is mostlysolid

3. The Japan Trench off the coast of Japan is part of the boundary between an
oceanic plate called the Pacific plate and a continental plate called the
Eurasian plate. At the trench, the pacific plate is forced beneath the
Eurasian plate, causing earthquakes in Japan.
The Japan Trench is an example of which type of crustal feature?
A. a tectonic plate
B. a mid-ocean ridge
C. a constructive margin
D. a destructive margin
4. Which of the following provides evidence that the present-day continents
were once one large continent that broke apart?
A. Australia is a large, continent-sized island.
B. Eurasia is the largest land mass on Earth today.
C. Australia and Antarctica are located in the Southern Hemisphere.
D. The west coast of Africa seems to fit into the east coast of the
Americas.
5. Which of the following is implied by the fact that seafloor spreading at the
Mid-Atlantic Ridge is causing the Atlantic Ocean to widen by about
5 centimeters a year?
A. The Mid-Atlantic Ridge is thousands of miles long.
B. The Mid-Atlantic Ridge is the largest underwater structure in the
Atlantic Ocean.
C. The continents of North America and Europe are moving apart.
D. The continents of North America and Europe are growing larger at the
Mid-Atlantic Ridge.
6. Which of the following is a theory rather than a fact?
A. The San Andreas fault is the boundary between the North American

and Pacific plates.
B. A single large landmass called Pangaea existed about 250 million years
ago.
C. The Earth’s crust is composed of rocks like granite, basalt, and gabbro.
D. Earthquakes often occur along tectonic plate boundaries.
Answers and explanations start on page 706.

Lesson 2: Earth’s Resources
Key Ideas
Natural resources include air, water, soil, minerals, and energy.
Resources are either renewable (having an endless supply) or
nonrenewable (having a limited supply).
Conservation efforts limit the consumption, overuse, and pollution of
the natural environment.

A resource is anything that is needed by humans to survive. Natural
resources include air, water, soil, minerals, and energy. Air is involved in
respiration, climate, and weather. Water is used for drinking, cooking,
bathing, agriculture, and industrial processes. Less than 3 percent of the
world’s water is fresh water. Soil is the layer of loose disintegrated rock,
organic matter, living organisms, air, and water in which rooted plants,
including agricultural plants, grow. Minerals are the naturally forming
inorganic substances with a crystalline structure of which rocks are made;
they have many uses—from talcum powder to uranium fuel rods to diamond
drill bits. Energy resources include fossil fuels, flowing water, wind, solar
energy, and geothermal energy.
Resources can be classified as nonrenewable or renewable. Nonrenewable
resources are those that take millions of years to form naturally; when they
are used up, there is no replacement for them. For example, fossil fuels,

including peat, coal, natural gas, and oil, are nonrenewable resources because
they form over millions of years from decaying plant remains. Fossil fuels are
our main source of energy for heating, transportation, and the generation of
electricity. Soil and minerals are also nonrenewable resources.
Renewable resources are those whose supply will not run out, either because
there is an unlimited supply, as is the case with solar energy (energy from
the sun), or because the resource cycles through the environment, as is the
case with water. In addition to solar energy, renewable energy resources
include the water power of flowing rivers, tidal and wave power from the
movement of ocean water, wind power from the movement of air, and
geothermal power from the heat in the Earth’s crust. All of these are used as
alternative sources of energy to generate electricity.
People harm or destroy natural resources through consumption, overuse, and
pollution. For example, some scientists estimate that we have already
consumed between one-tenth and one-quarter of the world’s supply of oil.
Soil is subject to agricultural overuse and erosion. Air is polluted by fossil
fuel emissions and its ozone layer is depleted by the release of compounds
called chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) into the atmosphere. Water is polluted by
sewage, industrial waste, and agricultural and urban runoff.
Conservation is any action taken to preserve natural resources and protect
the natural environment. Conservation involves a wide range of activities,
including building more efficient combustion engines to reduce gasoline
consumption; using catalytic converters to reduce the harmful emissions of
burning fossil fuels; developing technologies to exploit renewable sources of
energy; recycling glass, plastic, and metal wastes; using agricultural methods
that protect the soil; building water treatment and sewage treatment plants;
safely disposing of radioactive wastes; and cleaning up sites heavily polluted
by industry.

ON THE GED® TEST
Some Earth and space science questions may deal with the

impact of humans on natural resources and the environment.

Practice 2
Questions 1 through 3 refer to the following graph.

1. Approximately how many quadrillion Btus of petroleum were consumed
in 2011?
A. 160
B. 170
C. 174
D. 177
2. Between its low point in 2003 and its high point in 2011, the approximate
range of the data regarding world petroleum consumption was
__________ quadrillion Btus.
10
14
176
3. Which of the following sentences best summarizes the information in the
graph?

A. World petroleum consumption increased by about 14 quadrillion Btus
between 2003 and 2011.
B. World petroleum consumption fell by about 4 quadrillion Btus between
2005 and 2009.
C. World petroleum consumption increased by roughly 50 percent
between 2003 and 2007.
D. World petroleum consumption fell by roughly 50 percent between
2007 and 2009.
4. Which of the following proverbs best expresses the views of a
conservationist?
A. All that glitters is not gold.
B. Every cloud has a silver lining.
C. Oil and water don’t mix.
D. Waste not, want not.
5. The overall demand for water in the developed nations is rising. But it is
not rising as quickly as people had predicted it would. In fact, the rate of
water consumption per person per year in developed nations has actually
dropped. This means that even though population has increased and
industrial output has grown, the rate at which people withdraw water from
reservoirs, rivers, and aquifers has slowed.
Which of the following is a likely reason for the drop in per person
consumption of water in developed countries?
A. Vast new supplies of water have been found in the developed nations.
B. Developed nations have started using water more efficiently than they
did in the past.
C. Developed nations are sharing water resources with each other.
D. Some developed nations export fresh water to other nations that lack it.
6. Soil erosion occurs when soil is worn away by the natural action of wind,
water, and ice or by deforestation and poor farming practices. If soil
erosion continues for a long time, it can lead to the formation of deserts.
Some scientists estimate that the world lost about 20 percent of its farm

topsoil between 1950 and 1990. Contour plowing, planting trees to serve
as windbreaks, and other techniques can all reduce soil erosion.
Which of the following statements is supported by the information above?
A. All deserts originally formed as a result of soil erosion.
B. Most soil erosion is caused by poor farming practices.
C. Improved farming techniques can completely halt soil erosion.
D. Soil erosion is caused by both natural forces and the actions of people.
Answers and explanations start on page 706.

Lesson 3: Weather and Climate
Key Ideas
Weather is the day-to-day change in atmospheric conditions at a
particular place. Climate is the average long-term weather conditions
in a region.
Weather and climate are influenced by global air patterns and ocean
currents.
Daily weather is caused by the movement of air masses and is
predicted by meteorologists.

Weather is the day-to-day change in conditions in the atmosphere at a
particular place on Earth. Climate, on the other hand, is the average weather
conditions of a large region over a long period of time.

All weather and climate ultimately arise from the uneven heating of the
Earth. The sun’s rays fall more directly at the equator than they do at the
North and South Poles. This resulting uneven heating causes global wind
circulation patterns: the warm air at the equator rises, creating an area of low
pressure, and moves toward the poles. Cold air at the poles sinks, creating an
area of high pressure, and moves toward the equator. The result is a pattern of
prevailing winds in both the Northern and Southern hemispheres.

ON THE GED® TEST
About 20% of the questions on the Science Test will cover
Earth and space science topics.
Another major influence on weather and climate, also caused by the uneven
heating of Earth, is the worldwide pattern of ocean currents. Ocean currents
are caused by the wind and by variations in the density of water (warm water
is less dense than cold water). Ocean currents help transfer heat from the
equatorial regions to the poles.
Daily weather patterns are caused by the movements of air masses, large
bodies of air with similar temperature, humidity, and pressure. The boundary

between two air masses is called a front. A cold front occurs where a
cold air mass overtakes and displaces a warm air mass. A warm front occurs
where a warm air mass rises over a cold air mass. An occluded front occurs
when a cold front catches up with a warm front and the two weather systems
merge. Clouds and precipitation are characteristic of fronts.
Meteorologists study the short-term weather patterns and data of particular
areas. At meteorological stations around the world, temperature, humidity,
cloud cover, wind, and other weather data are collected. Satellites and radar
are also used to collect weather data. Weather predictions are based on
comparing present weather conditions to computer models of previous
weather conditions and storm systems in an area. When hurricanes,
tornadoes, blizzards, or floods are forecast, meteorologists issue storm
watches and warnings. For example, if a hurricane might reach an area in 24
to 36 hours, a hurricane watch is issued. If a hurricane is expected in an area
in less than 24 hours, a hurricane warning is issued, and people are urged to
take precautionary measures against the storm.

Practice 3
Questions 1 through 4 are based on the information on page 542.
1. The diagram of global wind patterns on page 542 suggests that weather
systems between 30°N and 60°N generally move in which direction?
A. northeast to southwest
B. northwest to southeast
C. southeast to northwest
D. southwest to northeast
2. Based on the diagram on page 542, how do the prevailing winds in the
Northern Hemisphere compare to the prevailing winds in the Southern
Hemisphere?
A. The winds in the Northern Hemisphere blow faster than those in the
Southern Hemisphere.

B. The winds in the Northern Hemisphere are a mirror image of those in
the Southern Hemisphere.
C. The winds in the Northern Hemisphere blow east and those in the
Southern Hemisphere blow west.
D. The winds in the Northern Hemisphere blow west and those in the
Southern Hemisphere blow east.
3. Hurricanes are violent storms with high winds and rain that form over the
ocean. They cover an area 300 to 600 miles across and move relatively
slowly—between 5 and 15 miles per hour. Meteorologists can now predict
their paths with a great deal of accuracy.
Which of the following technologies best accounts for accurate hurricane
tracking?
A. anemometers, which measure wind speed
B. thermometers, which measure air temperature
C. the Beaufort wind scale, a method of estimating wind speed
D. satellites, which transmit cloud photos and weather data
4. Which of the following help even out the unbalanced heating of Earth as a
whole?
A. precipitation associated with fronts
B. local air masses
C. tornadoes, blizzards, and floods
D. global wind and ocean current patterns
Questions 5 and 6 refer to the following chart.
Layers of the Atmosphere
Layer

Altitude

Temperature

Troposphere

0 to 6 miles

Average 59°F

Stratosphere

6 to 31 miles

–76°F to 32°F

Mesosphere and ionosphere

31 to 50 miles

32°F to –212°F

Thermosphere

50 to 435 miles

Up to thousands of
degrees

5. For which of the following statements does the chart provide evidence?
A. The higher you go in the atmosphere, the colder it gets.
B. The higher you go in the atmosphere, the less oxygen there is to
breathe.
C. The highest layer of the atmosphere is the stratosphere.
D. The highest temperatures in the atmosphere are in the thermosphere.
6. In the chart, draw a stick-figure inhabitant in the atmospheric layer in
which most human activity takes place.

Answers and explanations start on page 706.

Lesson 4: Earth in the Solar System
Key Ideas
The solar system consists of the sun; the planets; their satellites, or
moons; the asteroids; and the comets.
There are eight planets: Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn,
Uranus, and Neptune.
The moon revolves around Earth every 27 days and appears to go
through phases.

The solar system consists of the sun, a star; the planets; their satellites, or
moons; the asteroids, sometimes called the minor planets; and the comets.
The sun contains more than 99 percent of the mass (amount of matter) in the
solar system, and all the other celestial bodies revolve around it, held by the
force of gravity.
The eight planets of the solar system include (in order from the sun) Mercury,
Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune. Mercury, Venus,
Earth, and Mars are called the inner planets because they are relatively close
to the sun. They are all small, rocky planets. Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and
Neptune are called the outer planets because of their great distance from the
sun. The outer planets are gas giants. Some facts about the planets are
presented in the following chart.

GED® TEST TIP
Some Science Test questions are based on detailed charts
similar to the one on this page. Read the question carefully and
select only the specific information needed to answer the
question.
The Planets of Our Solar System
Planet

Distance Diameter Number
Rotation
from sun
of moons period (day)

Revolution
period
(year)

Mercury

36
million
mi

3,030 mi

None

59 Earth
days

88 Earth
days

Venus

67
million
mi

7,500 mi

None

243 Earth
days

225 Earth
days

Earth

93

7,923 mi

1

23 hr 56 min 365 days 5 hr

million
mi

4.1 sec

48 min 46
sec

Mars

142
million
mi

4,210 mi

2

24 hr 37 min

687 Earth
days

Jupiter

484
million
mi

88,700
mi

50

9 hr 51 min

11.86 Earth
years

Saturn

0.9
billion
mi

75,000
mi

53

10 hr 14 min

29.46 Earth
years

Uranus

1.8
billion
mi

31,600
mi

27

17 hr 12 min

84 Earth
years

Neptune

2.8
billion
mi

30,200
mi

13

16 hr 7 min

164.8 Earth
years

Earth is unusual among the planets in that about 70 percent of its surface is
covered by water. It is the only celestial body in the solar system on which
life is known to exist. Earth’s rocky satellite, the moon, is the fifth largest
satellite in the solar system. It has no atmosphere, but it does have some
surface ice, which was discovered in 1998. The moon revolves around Earth
once every 27 days. During the lunar month, the moon appears to go through
a series of phases—changes in the proportion of its surface that is in shadow.
The cycle of phases takes approximately 29 days. U.S. astronauts landed on
the moon in several missions from 1969 to 1972, making it the only celestial
body visited by crewed spacecraft.

Practice 4
Questions 1 through 4 are based on the information on page 544.
1. According to the chart on page 544, which of the planets takes the shortest

time to revolve, or complete its orbit, around the sun?
A. Mars
B. Saturn
C. Neptune
D. Mercury
2. According to the chart, which of the following planets is most similar to
Earth?
A. Mercury
B. Venus
C. Jupiter
D. Neptune
3. Before 1781, the only planets that were known were the ones visible to the
naked eye: Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn. In 1781, William
Herschel, an astronomer who made his own superb and powerful
telescopes, discovered a strange “star” that appeared as a greenish disk
rather than a point of light. A few nights later, he observed that this “star”
had moved relative to the background of the other stars. Herschel realized
he had discovered another planet. It was named Uranus, after the Greek
sky god. Later it was found that Uranus had actually been observed at
least 20 times before, as far back as 1690, but each time it had been
identified as a star.
Which of the following is an unstated assumption that could help account
for the fact that Uranus was misidentified as a star prior to 1781?
A. Uranus takes 84 Earth years to revolve around the sun.
B. The length of a day on Uranus is about 17 hours.
C. Uranus was not clearly visible with the telescopes generally in use at
the time.
D. Uranus was not visible when it was on the other side of the sun.
4. According to the chart on page 544, which of the following planets has the
most moons?

A. Jupiter
B. Saturn
C. Uranus
D. Neptune
5. According to some estimates, it would cost about ten times more to send a
crewed mission to Mars to collect geologic samples and look for life than
it would cost to send a robotic mission. Some people think that a human
mission would yield much more relevant data, justifying the additional
cost. Others think there is no scientific reason to send crewed missions,
which are costly and risky, when robotic missions will do.
Which of the following values is most likely to provide the motivation to
send a crewed mission to Mars despite the risk and the additional cost?
A. a desire to provide equal opportunities for astronauts of all nationalities
B. a desire for economic development
C. a desire to demonstrate the superiority of computers over humans
D. faith in human judgment and decision-making skills
6. The structure of the solar system, with the massive sun at the center and
many objects revolving around it, is most similar to the structure of which
of the following?
A. a DNA molecule, with its twisted spiral shape
B. an atom, with a dense nucleus and electrons orbiting the nucleus
C. the electromagnetic spectrum, with waves of different lengths and
frequencies
D. the planet Earth, with its layers of crust, mantle, and core
Answers and explanations start on page 707.

Lesson 5: The Expanding Universe

Key Ideas
Stars are globes of hydrogen and helium that produce their own heat
and light through nuclear reactions.
The sun is one star in the Milky Way galaxy, a large group of stars.
The Big Bang theory helps explain the origin of the universe.
According to this theory, the universe began as a compact spot of
matter that exploded.

Our sun is a medium-sized yellow star, a globe of helium and hydrogen gas
that produces its own heat and light through nuclear reactions. Stars like our
sun generally have a 10-billion-year life cycle. They begin as protostars,
which form from clouds of condensing gases and dust called nebulae. As a
protostar reaches a certain density and temperature, nuclear reactions begin,
releasing huge amounts of energy. At this point, the star is known as a mainsequence star, the longest stage in the stellar life cycle. After billions of
years, the star begins to run out of hydrogen fuel. It may become a red giant.
In time, the red giant becomes unstable and collapses, either exploding as a
supernova and leaving behind a neutron star or losing mass slowly to
become a white dwarf. A neutron star can be very dense, and gravity
sometimes causes it to collapse in on itself, producing a black hole. Black
holes are so called because their gravity is so great that light cannot escape
from them.
The sun is just one star in a huge group of stars called the Milky Way galaxy.
Galaxies consist of between one million and one trillion stars, along with
clouds of gas and dust, which are held together by the force of gravity.
Galaxies are classified according to their shape: spiral, barred-spiral,
elliptical, and irregular. The Milky Way is a spiral galaxy. A spiral galaxy has
a dense circular center with arms spiraling out from the core. Our solar
system is located in one of the arms, called the Orion arm, of the Milky Way
galaxy.

ON THE GED® TEST

Some questions on the Science Test require that you
understand cause-and-effect relationships.
The Milky Way galaxy is part of a group of galaxies called the Local Group.
There are 27 known galaxies in the Local Group, of which the Milky Way
and the Andromeda galaxy are the largest.
The universe consists mostly of empty space with galaxies scattered
throughout. Besides galaxies with stars at every stage of the life cycle, the
universe has other bodies: brown dwarfs are objects that are less massive
than a star but more massive than a planet; pulsars are thought to be rotating
neutron stars that emit pulses of energy at regular intervals; and quasars are
distant starlike objects that emit more energy than a hundred galaxies.
Cosmologists study the origin, properties, and evolution of the universe. One
theory about the beginning of the universe is called the Big Bang. According
to this theory, the universe began in a hot, superdense state smaller than an
atom. The Big Bang caused all this compacted material to be flung outward,
accounting for the still-expanding universe. There is evidence to support the
Big Bang theory. First, galaxies appear to be moving away from one another
in every direction, as if they had originated at a common point. Second,
scientists have detected cosmic background radiation left over from the Big
Bang. Cosmologists do not know what caused the Big Bang, but from the
current rate of expansion of the universe, they estimate its age to be between
10 and 20 billion years.

Practice 5
Questions 1 through 3 refer to the following paragraph and chart.
In astronomy, magnitude is an indication of the brightness of a celestial body.
Magnitudes are measured along a scale from positive to zero to negative,
with brightness increasing as magnitude decreases. Apparent magnitude is
the brightness as seen from Earth, either by the naked eye or
photographically. Absolute magnitude is a measure of the actual brightness of
an object. It is defined as the apparent magnitude the object would have if it

were located 32.6 light-years from Earth.
The Five Brightest Stars
Star

Distance
from Earth
(light-years)

Apparent
magnitude

Absolute
magnitude

Sirius

8.7

–1.47

+1.41

Canopus

180

–0.71

–4.7

Alpha Centauri

4.3

–0.1

+4.3

Arcturus

36

–0.06

–0.2

Vega

26

+0.03

+0.5

1. Choose information from the chart below to fill in the blanks. As seen
from Earth, (1)
is the brightest star. However, if all the stars
listed in the chart were 32.6 light-years from Earth, then (2)
would be brightest.
Select (1)

Select (2)

Sirius

Sirius

Canopus

Canopus

Alpha Centauri

Alpha Centauri

Arcturus

Arcturus

Vega

Vega

2. Which of the following would be true of a star with a position 32.6 lightyears from Earth?
A. The star’s absolute magnitude would be less than that of Alpha
Centauri.
B. The star’s apparent magnitude would be greater than its absolute
magnitude.

C. The star’s apparent magnitude would be equal to its absolute
magnitude.
D. The star’s apparent magnitude would be greater than that of Arcturus.
3. A magazine article makes the following statement about stars: A star’s
apparent magnitude and its absolute magnitude must always be close in
value.
Which of the following explains why the magazine’s statement is
incorrect?
A. Stars form from huge masses of dust and gas.
B. The absolute magnitude of a star indicates how bright the star looks to
viewers on Earth.
C. The apparent magnitude of a star is a measure of the amount of light
the star puts out.
D. Not all stars are located about 32.6 light-years from Earth.
4. The sun is about 4.7 billion years old. Based on the information on page
546, at which stage of its life cycle is the sun?
A. It is a protostar.
B. It is a main-sequence star.
C. It is a neutron star.
D. It is a white dwarf.
5. Pluto has a diameter of just 1,438 miles. It is made mostly of ice and
frozen rock. It is very small and has an irregular orbit. It was originally
classified as the ninth planet from the Sun, but it has been recategorized as
a dwarf planet within the Kuiper belt.
Which of the following is not a factual detail about Pluto?
A. Pluto has a diameter of 1,438 miles.
B. Pluto is made mostly of ice and frozen rock.
C. Pluto has an irregular orbit.
D. Pluto should be classified as a dwarf planet.

Answers and explanations start on page 707.

Earth and Space Science Practice Questions
1. Tides are the twice-daily rise and fall of water along the shores of the
oceans. Tides are caused mainly by the gravitational pull of the moon, and
secondarily by the gravitational pull of the sun. The highest tides, called
spring tides, occur when the sun, moon, and Earth are in line. Other high
tides, called neap tides, occur when the sun and moon are at right angles
with respect to Earth.
Which of the following statements is supported by the information above?
A. The moon and the sun exert the greatest pull on Earth’s oceans when
these bodies are all in a line.
B. When the moon is at right angles to the sun with respect to Earth, tides
do not occur along the ocean shore.
C. Spring tides occur only in the spring, and neap tides occur only in the
fall.
D. Neap tides are generally higher than spring tides.
2. Geothermal energy is energy extracted from naturally occurring steam, hot
water, or hot rocks in Earth’s crust. It is used to heat buildings and
generate electricity in areas where hot magma (melted rock) is close to the
surface.
In which of the following places is geothermal energy most likely to be
used?
A. Arizona, a state where abundant sunshine provides solar energy
B. Cape Cod, a peninsula formed from glacial deposits of sand
C. Iceland, an island nation in the Atlantic with active volcanoes
D. Saudi Arabia, a Middle Eastern nation with ample oil and gas reserves
Questions 3 and 4 refer to the following paragraph and graph.

Scientists think there may be more matter and energy in the universe than has
been directly observed because of some gravitational effects that cannot be
explained otherwise. Dark matter and dark energy, so-called because they do
not interact with light, may account for most of the stuff of the universe. In
fact, ordinary matter, made of the chemical elements, may form only 4
percent of the universe.

3. According to the graph, about what percentage of the universe may consist
of matter that does not interact with light?
A. less than 0.01 percent
B. 0.5 percent
C. 4 percent
D. 26 percent
4. Which of the following statements is a fact rather than a hypothesis about
the makeup of the universe?
A. Dark energy may account for 70 percent of the universe.
B. Dark matter may account for 26 percent of the universe.
C. Dark energy may cause gravitational effects.
D. Ordinary matter is made of the chemical elements.
Questions 5 through 8 refer to the following map.

5. Which type of climate is characteristic of areas along the equator?
A. polar
B. temperate-snow
C. desert-steppe
D. tropical-subtropical
6. Which of the following statements is supported by information on the
map?
A. The continent with the least area of desert-steppe climate is Europe.
B. Australia’s climate is entirely tropical-subtropical.
C. Africa and South America do not have areas with highland climate.
D. Only North America has a large temperate-snow climate zone.
7. Temperate-snow climate zones hold only one-third of the world’s people
yet produce about two-thirds of the world’s wealth. Historically, the fact
that temperate-snow climate zones have more
than other
climate zones do is the most likely explanation for this discrepancy
between population and productivity.

farm output
seasons
tropical rain forests
8. The continents shown above have, on average, how many different climate
zones? Write your answer on the line below. You May use your
calculator.
Questions 9 and 10 are based on the following diagrams.

9. Fill in the blanks using the options below. Based on the diagram, a lunar
eclipse occurs when (1)
passes between (2)
and
the sun.
Select (1)

Select (2)

the moon

the sun

the sun

Earth

Earth

the moon

the moon’s umbra

the moon’s penumbra

10. Which of the following statements is supported by the information in the
diagram?
A. During a solar eclipse, the sun passes through Earth’s umbra.

B. During a lunar eclipse, the sun passes through the moon’s umbra.
C. A lunar eclipse can be seen only at night and a solar eclipse can be
seen only during the day.
D. A maximum of five solar eclipses and thirteen lunar eclipses are
possible during each year.
Questions 11 and 12 are based on the following passage.
Acid rain is a form of precipitation caused by the release of sulfur dioxide
and nitrogen oxide into the atmosphere. Acid rain is comprised of a mixture
of wet and dry deposition. If the acidic chemicals in the air blow into places
with wet weather, the acids fall to the ground in the form of rain or fog,
affecting plant and animal life. In drier climates, the acidic chemicals mix
into dust or smoke, which will then fall to the ground or on trees or buildings.
These deposits are later washed off by rainstorms. The addition of water to
these chemicals makes the resulting mixture more acidic.
The acidic chemicals themselves form as a byproduct of burning fossil fuels,
such as coal, oil, diesel, and gasoline. Acid rain alters the chemical balance of
lakes, affecting aquatic life. It also alters the chemical balance of soil,
harming plant life. In addition, it damages buildings and statues.
11. Which of the following technologies can help reduce acid rain?
A. a diesel locomotive, which burns diesel fuel to produce energy that is
used to turn the wheels
B. an electric power plant that burns coal to heat water and produce steam
to drive turbines, which power the generator
C. a refinery, which purifies metals, petroleum, and other substances into
a more useful form
D. a catalytic converter, a device in the exhaust system of a vehicle that
reduces harmful emissions from the engine
12. The pH of a lake located in an arid region has been falling for several
years. Which of the following processes could be responsible?
A. dispersal of mineral dust high in calcium carbonate from desert soil by
wind currents

B. dry deposition of sulfur dioxide emissions from a nearby coal-burning
power plant
C. unusual weather patterns caused by climate change
D. generation of electricity by a nearby hydroelectric power plant
Questions 13 through 15 refer to the following diagram.

13. Which of the following statements is supported by the information in the
diagram?
A. The rock cycle is a continuous process of rock formation, destruction,
and reformation.
B. Sedimentary rocks form under conditions of heat and pressure.
C. Metamorphic rocks form under conditions of compaction and
cementation.
D. Sediments form only from sedimentary rocks.
14. Fossils can form when plant or animal remains are buried under sand,
mud, or silt. These materials can be compacted to form rock. A hiker
knew she had found a(n)
because it contained the fossilized

imprint of a fish.
igneous rock
sedimentary rock
rock formed from magma
15. What is magma?
A. melted rock
B. crystallized rock
C. cooled rock
D. eroded rock
16. In open-pit mining, surface layers of soil and rock are stripped to obtain
coal, ores, or minerals. It is cheaper than shaft mining because there is no
underground work.
Which of the following is the most likely reason that some countries
restrict open-pit mining?
A. There are no underground deposits.
B. Open-pit mining is more dangerous than shaft mining.
C. Open-pit mining destroys valuable land.
D. Open-pit mining yields low-grade coal, ores, and minerals.
Answers and explanations start on page 707.

CHAPTER 4

Physical Science
Lesson 1: Atoms and Molecules
Key Ideas
Atoms are formed of positively charged protons, neutral neutrons,
and negatively charged electrons.
All matter can be classified as elements, compounds, or mixtures.
Atoms are held together in molecules and compounds by bonds.

All matter is made of tiny particles called atoms. An atom is the smallest unit
of matter that can combine chemically with other matter and that cannot be
broken down into smaller particles by chemical means. Atoms are themselves
made of subatomic particles. The major subatomic particles are protons,
neutrons, and electrons. Protons are particles with a positive charge, and
neutrons are particles with no charge. Together, protons and neutrons form
the nucleus of all atoms except hydrogen, which has just one proton in its
nucleus. Electrons are particles with negative charge. Electrons orbit the
nucleus of an atom. When an atom has an equal number of protons and
electrons, it is electrically neutral. When an atom gains or loses electrons, it

becomes a negatively charged or positively charged ion.
Matter can be classified as elements, compounds, or mixtures.
Elements are substances that cannot be broken down into other
substances. They are made of a single type of atom. Gold, iron,
hydrogen, sodium, oxygen, and carbon are some familiar elements.
Each element has a chemical symbol. For example, gold is Au, iron is
Fe, hydrogen is H, sodium is Na, oxygen is O, and carbon is C.
Compounds are substances formed of two or more elements chemically
combined in a definite proportion. Compounds have properties that
differ from the properties of the elements that they contain. For
example, at room temperature, water is a liquid compound made of the
elements hydrogen and oxygen, which, uncombined, are both gases.
Compounds are represented by chemical formulas. The chemical
formula for water is H2O, indicating that a water molecule is made of
two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen.
Mixtures are physical combinations of two or more substances that
keep their own properties. For example, salt water is a mixture.

GED® TEST TIP
If you are having trouble choosing the correct answer to a
multiple-choice question, eliminate the options that are clearly
wrong. Of the remaining options, choose the one that makes the
most sense.
When elements combine to form molecules or ionic compounds, their
constituents are held together by bonds. There are two main types of bonds:
covalent and ionic. In a covalent bond, atoms share a pair of electrons, each
atom contributing one electron. For example, the compound water is held
together by covalent bonds. In an ionic bond, atoms gain or lose electrons to
become ions, and the attraction between positively (+) and negatively (-)
charged ions holds the compound together. For example, sodium chloride

(NaCl), commonly called table salt, is an ionic compound.

Practice 1
Questions 1 through 3 are based on the information on page 552.
1. Sodium is represented by the chemical symbol Na and chlorine is
represented by the chemical symbol Cl. According to the text and the
diagram on page 552, what happens when sodium chloride forms?
A. The sodium atom loses an electron, becoming positively charged, and
the chlorine atom gains an electron, becoming negatively charged.
B. The sodium atom gains an electron, becoming negatively charged, and
the chlorine atom loses an electron, becoming positively charged.
C. The sodium atom gains an electron, becoming positively charged, and
the chlorine atom loses an electron, becoming negatively charged.
D. The sodium and chlorine atoms share a pair of electrons, becoming
ions and forming a covalent bond.
2. Water is composed of two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen and
has the formula H2O. Glucose, a simple sugar, consists of 6 atoms of
carbon, 12 atoms of hydrogen, and 6 atoms of oxygen.

Which of the following is the chemical formula for glucose?
A. CHO
B. 6C12H6O
C. C6H12O6
D. C6H12O6
2. Choose statements from the chart below to fill in the blanks.
Based on the information on page 552, atoms are (1)
are (2)
.

and ions

Select (1)

Select (2)

not necessarily either positively or
negatively charged

not necessarily either positively or
negatively charged

positively charged

positively charged

negatively charged

negatively charged

either positively or negatively
charged

either positively or negatively
charged

4. In 1911, British scientist Ernest Rutherford performed experiments that
increased our knowledge of atomic structure. He bombarded an extremely
thin sheet of gold foil with helium nuclei. (Helium nuclei, also called
alpha particles, consist of two protons and two neutrons.) He found that
most of the helium nuclei passed right through the foil. Only a few were
deflected back toward the source. On the basis of this experiment,
Rutherford concluded that an atom has a dense nucleus with electrons
orbiting it, but consists mostly of empty space.
Which of the following is evidence that atoms consist mostly of empty
space?
A. Helium nuclei consist of two protons and two neutrons.
B. Most of the alpha particles passed right through the gold foil.

C. A few alpha particles were deflected off the gold foil and bounced
back toward the source.
D. Electrons orbit a dense nucleus consisting of protons and neutrons.
5. The number of protons in the nucleus of an atom is called the atomic
number. Each element has a unique number of protons in its nucleus and
therefore a unique atomic number.
The atomic number of the element sodium is 11. How many electrons does
a non-ionic sodium atom have?
A. 10
B. 11
C. 12
D. 22
Answers and explanations start on page 708.

Lesson 2: Properties and States of Matter
Key Ideas
Matter has mass and occupies space.
The three states of matter include solid, liquid, and gas. A substance’s
state of matter can be changed by adding or removing heat.
Solutions are a type of mixture. The solute is the dissolved substance.
The solvent is what the solute is dissolved in. Solvents and solutes
can be any of the states of matter.

Matter is anything that has mass and takes up space. The mass of an object
is the amount of matter that it contains, and its weight is a measure of the
gravitational force exerted on it. The mass of an object like a shovel never
changes, but its weight can change. For example, a shovel weighs less on the

moon than it does on Earth because the gravitational pull of the moon is less
than that of Earth.
Under most conditions, there are three states of matter, as described below:
Solids have a definite shape and volume because the molecules of
which they are made occupy fixed positions and do not move freely. In
some solids, such as minerals, the molecules form an orderly pattern
called a crystal.
Liquids have a definite volume but no definite shape because the
molecules in a liquid are loosely bound and move freely. For this
reason, a liquid conforms to the shape of its container.
Gases have no definite shape or volume. The attraction between the
molecules of a gas is very weak. In consequence, the molecules of a gas
are far apart and are always in motion, colliding with one another and
with the sides of the container.

ON THE GED® TEST
Approximately 40% of the questions on the Science Test are
about physical science topics.
The states of matter can be changed by adding or removing heat energy.
When heat is applied to a solid, it melts. This happens because the motion of
the solid’s molecules increases until the bonds between them are loosened,
allowing them to flow freely. The temperature at which a solid becomes a
liquid is its melting point. When heat is applied to a liquid, it boils and
evaporates, turning into a gas as the motion of its molecules increases. The
temperature at which a liquid becomes a gas is called its boiling point. When
heat is removed from a gas, the motion of its molecules decreases and it turns
into a liquid. The temperature at which a gas becomes a liquid is its
condensation point. When heat is removed from a liquid, the motion of its
molecules slows until it solidifies. The temperature at which a liquid becomes
a solid is its freezing point. The temperatures at which a substance changes
state are unique properties of that substance. For example, water boils at

100°C (212°F) and freezes at 0°C (32°F). Water is also the only substance
that is found naturally in all three states on Earth.
As you learned in Lesson 1, mixtures are physical combinations of two or
more substances that keep their original properties. A solution is a mixture
(such as salt water) that is uniform throughout and that contains ions, atoms,
or molecules of two or more substances. The substance in a solution that is
dissolved is called the solute. The substance in which the solute is dissolved
is the solvent. In salt water, for example, salt is the solute and water is the
solvent. Water is called the universal solvent because so many substances
dissolve in it. However, solutions are not always liquids. They can be solids,
as when two or more metals are combined in an alloy, or they can be gases,
as when oxygen and nitrogen are combined in the air.

Practice 2
Question 1 is based on page 554.
1. Which of the following physical changes involve adding heat to a
substance?
A. melting and boiling
B. boiling and condensing
C. condensing and freezing
D. evaporating and condensing
2. Density is the amount of mass in a particular volume of a substance. It can
be expressed in grams per cubic centimeter. The chart shows the densities
of some common substances.
Densities of Substances
Substance
Solids
Lead

Density (g/cm3)
11.35
7.87

Iron
Aluminum

2.70

Liquids
Chloroform
Water
Ethyl alcohol

1.49
1.00
0.79

Gases
Oxygen
Nitrogen
Helium

0.0013
0.0012
0.0002

Which of the following statements is supported by the information
provided?
A. Water is the least dense liquid on Earth.
B. Solids are usually denser than liquids and gases.
C. Density increases as the volume of a substance increases.
D. Density decreases as the force of gravity decreases.
3. It is well known that the boiling point of water is 100° Celsius. More
viscous, or thicker, substances often have higher boiling points. Glycerin,
for example, boils at 290° Celsius, while olive oil boils at 300° Celsius.
By what percentage is the boiling point of glycerin greater than that of
water? You MAY use your calculator. Write your answer on the line
below.
4. Water is different from most other substances. It changes from gas to
liquid to solid at temperatures that are common on Earth. When it freezes,
its molecules form a crystal lattice, so that its solid form is less dense than
its liquid form. It is the most common solvent.
Which of the following is a conclusion about water rather than a
supporting statement?
A. Water is a unique substance on Earth.
B. Water changes state at temperatures typical on Earth.

C. Frozen water is less dense than liquid water.
D. Water is Earth’s most common solvent.
5. When a solute is dissolved in a liquid solvent, the freezing point of the
solution is lower than the freezing point of the pure liquid.
In which of the following situations is this property of liquid solutions
applied?
A. Sugar dissolves in water more quickly if the solution is heated.
B. Antifreeze added to water in a car’s radiator lowers the freezing point
below 0°C.
C. The oil and vinegar in salad dressing is mixed more thoroughly by
shaking.
D. Spherical ice “cubes” freeze more quickly than regular ice cubes do.
6. A suspension is a mixture in which the distributed particles are larger than
those of the solvent and in which the particles, in time, will settle out.
Which of the following is a suspension?
A. pure gold
B. pure oxygen
C. salt water
D. dusty air
Answers and explanations start on page 708.

Lesson 3: Chemical Reactions
Key Ideas
In a chemical reaction, the atoms or ions of one or more reactants are
rearranged, yielding one or more products. Mass is conserved during
chemical reactions.

Chemical reactions can be represented by chemical formulas.
Chemical reactions are either endothermic or exothermic.

In a chemical reaction, the atoms or ions of one or more substances, called
the reactants, are rearranged, resulting in one or more different substances,
called the products. For example, iron, water, and oxygen react to form
hydrated iron oxide, or rust. Matter is neither created nor destroyed during a
chemical reaction, so the mass of the products always equals the mass of the
reactants. This principle is known as the law of conservation of mass.
Chemical reactions can be represented by chemical equations. Chemical
equations show the reactants on the left side and the products on the right
side. They also show the proportions of the reacting substances—how many
units of each reactant and each product are involved. Because of the law of
conservation of mass, a chemical equation must balance. That is, the total
number of atoms of an element on the left side must be equal to the total
number of atoms of the element on the right side. Here is the chemical
equation that represents the burning of hydrogen and oxygen to yield water.
2H2 + O2 → 2H2O
Restated in words: two molecules of hydrogen (H2) combine with one
molecule of oxygen (O2) to form two molecules of water (H2O). The
equation balances because there are four hydrogen atoms on the left side and
four on the right; there are two oxygen atoms on the left side and two on the
right. To balance a chemical equation, you can change the coefficients—the
number of units of any reactant or product. However, you cannot change the
subscripts of any reactant or product.

GED® TEST TIP
There is no penalty for getting a wrong answer on the test. if
you are not sure of your answer, make your best guess, flag the
question, and come back to it if you complete the test before

time is up.
Energy is involved in all chemical reactions. A reaction in which the
reactants absorb energy from their surroundings is an endothermic reaction.
For example, when you scramble an egg, you add heat energy and the egg
solidifies. A reaction in which energy is given off with the products, usually
in the form of heat or light, is an exothermic reaction. When you burn wood
in a fireplace, for example, heat and light energy are given off. Activation
energy is the amount of energy needed to get a reaction going. These energy
relationships can be shown in graphs like those below.

Practice 3
1. Which of the following chemical formulas represents the reaction in which
copper (Cu) and oxygen gas (O2O) combine to form copper oxide (CuO)?
A. 2CuO → 2Cu+O2
B. Cu+O2 → 2CuO2
C. 2Cu+O2 → 2CuO
D. Cu+2O2 → 2CuO
2. Which of the following procedures would provide evidence for the law of
conservation of mass?
A. Weigh the reactants, conduct the reaction in an open container, and
weigh the products.

B. Weigh the reactants, conduct the reaction in a sealed container, and
weigh the products.
C. Measure the volume of the reactants, conduct the reaction in a sealed
container, and measure the volume of the products.
D. Write the chemical formula for the reaction and balance it.
3. Juanita would like to cook a scrambled egg on her gas stove. When she
first turns on the stove’s burner, the electronic ignition produces a spark
that sets the gas burning. As the gas burns, it heats the frying pan. As the
egg cooks, it absorbs the heat energy from the pan and solidifies.
Match the correct form of energy needed with each step of Juanita’s
cooking process.

4. In the graphs on page 556, what does the hori-zontal axis represent?
A. the instant the reaction starts
B. the instant the reaction stops
C. the time during which the reaction occurs
D. the energy level in the reaction
5. Organic compounds are those containing linked carbon atoms that form
bonds with other atoms, usually hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, and/or
sulfur. Organic compounds consist of chains, branching chains, rings, and
other complex arrangements of carbon atoms with which other atoms
bond. One type of organic compound is a polymer, a large long-chain or

branching structure made up of many repeated simple units, called
monomers. Natural polymers include cellulose. Synthetic polymers
include polyethylene and other types of plastics.
Which of the following is taken for granted and not stated by the writer of
the paragraph above?
A. Compounds are substances consisting of two or more elements
chemically combined in a definite proportion.
B. Organic compounds have linked carbon atoms forming bonds with
other atoms, usually hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, and/or sulfur.
C. Chains are among the arrangements carbon atoms in an organic
compound can take.
D. Plastics are synthetic polymers and cellulose is a natural polymer.
6. An acid is a compound that releases hydrogen ions (H+), or protons, in the
presence of water. Strong acids, like battery acid and stomach acid, are
corrosive. Most dilute acids, like lemon juice, have a sour taste.
A base is a compound that accepts hydrogen ions, or protons. Household
cleaners like ammonia, lye, and bleach are bases. When an acid reacts with
a base, the product is a salt and water. This reaction is called neutralization.
Which of the following is the best title for this passage?
A. “Corrosive Substances”
B. “Acids and Bases”
C. “Acids and Bases in the Lab”
D. “Neutralization Reactions”
Answers and explanations start on page 709.

Lesson 4: The Nature of Energy
Key Ideas

Anything that can force matter to move, change direction, or change
speed has energy.
Energy comes in many forms and can be converted from one form to
another.
The law of conservation of energy states that energy can neither be
created nor destroyed, only changed in form.

Energy is defined as the capacity to do work. Work is done whenever a
force is applied to an object to set it in motion. Thus, anything that can force
matter to move, change direction, or change speed has energy.
Energy comes in many forms. Heat energy can change a solid to a liquid and
a liquid to a gas. It is also involved in most chemical reactions. Light energy
can create an image by causing the chemicals on a piece of film to react. It
provides the energy needed for the process of photosynthesis in green plants.
Electrical energy can turn a motor, plate a set of flatware with a layer of
silver, or store data on a hard drive. Chemical energy in food provides the
energy humans need for life functions. It heats our buildings when we burn
oil, gas, coal, or wood. Chemical energy in batteries provides electricity when
the batteries are connected in a circuit. Nuclear energy from breaking apart
the nuclei of atoms provides energy to produce electricity or power a
submarine. Mechanical energy turns the axles of a car or the blades of a fan.

ON THE GED® TEST
Since many Science Test questions are based on diagrams and
graphs, it is important to carefully read the titles and all of the
other information on all graphics. Make sure you understand a
graphic before answering questions based on it.
Energy can be converted from one form to another. Consider the production
and use of electricity. In most electric plants, a fossil fuel (chemical energy)
is burned, producing heat energy that turns water to steam. The energy in the

steam turns the blades of a turbine, producing mechanical energy. The turbine
powers the generator, which produces electrical energy. Electrical energy is
used in homes to provide heat energy (in stoves and toasters), light energy (in
light bulbs), sound energy (in the stereo), and mechanical energy (in a
blender). Even though energy undergoes changes in form, the amount of
energy in a closed system remains the same. This principle is known as the
law of conservation of energy.
Two basic types of energy are potential energy and kinetic energy. An
object has potential energy because of its position; it has kinetic energy when
it moves. For example, when you raise a hammer, at the top of your upswing
the hammer has potential energy. When you lower the hammer to hit a nail,
the hammer has kinetic energy, the energy of motion. When the hammer hits
the nail, it transfers energy to the nail. The energy transferred is equal to the
work done by the hammer on the nail, and it can be measured in joules. The
rate of doing work or consuming energy is called power, and it can be
measured in horsepower (in the English system) or watts (joules per second
in the metric system).
Physicist Albert Einstein discovered the relationship between energy and
mass and expressed it in the equation E = mc2, in which E represents energy,
m represents mass, and c represents the speed of light. Since the speed of
light is a very large number, the equation indicates there is a great deal of
energy in even the tiniest bit of matter. So, for example, in nuclear bombs and
nuclear power plants, mass is changed to energy when large atoms are split
into two or more smaller atoms with less mass than the original large atom.

Practice 4
Questions 1 through 4 are based on the information on page 558.
1. Which of the following states the law of conservation of energy?
A. Potential energy is the energy of position; kinetic energy is the energy
of motion.
B. Energy can be created and destroyed as well as changed in form.

C. Energy cannot be created or destroyed, but can only change in form.
D. Energy cannot be created, destroyed, or changed in form.
2. During a power outage, George relied upon his flashlight to move around
his home. The flashlight is constructed with wires and a lightbulb
enclosed in a plastic casing. It requires batteries to operate.
Write in the three types of energy involved in turning on and using the
flashlight.

3. An oak tree may grow very tall very slowly. It may take the tree a hundred
years to absorb light energy and store it as chemical energy, yet only a
single winter to be turned into heat energy in someone’s wood stove.
Which concept does this fact best relate to?
A. work
B. power
C. force
D. kinetic energy
4. What does Einstein’s equation E = mc2 express?
A. the relationship between electricity and magnetism
B. the relationship between energy and mass
C. the speed of light in a vacuum
D. the relationship between electrical energy and nuclear energy
Question 5 refers to the following diagram.

5. Which of the following statements is supported by the information in the
diagram?
A. At the high point of its swing, a pendulum has kinetic energy.
B. At the high point of its swing, a pendulum has potential energy.
C. As a pendulum swings through one arc, it loses all its energy.
D. A pendulum can swing forever because of kinetic energy.
6. Heat energy is present in all matter in the form of the kinetic energy of its
atoms and molecules. Heat energy can pass from one place to another
through conduction: the transfer of kinetic energy from molecules in
greater motion (hot areas) to molecules of lesser motion (cold areas).
Solid metals like silver and copper are good conductors of heat energy;
gases like air are poor conductors.
What is the reason that air is a poor conductor of heat?
A. The molecules in air are far apart.
B. The molecules in air are very large.
C. The molecules in air do not move.
D. The molecules in air are very small.
Answers and explanations start on page 709.

Lesson 5: Motion and Forces

Key Ideas
Speed is the rate at which an object moves; velocity is speed in a
given direction; acceleration is the rate at which velocity changes.
A force is anything that changes the state of rest or motion of an
object.
Newton stated three laws of motion that explain the inertia,
acceleration, and momentum of objects.

Everything in the universe is in motion. Even objects that seem to be at rest,
like a building, are moving with Earth’s rotation. Speed is the rate at which
an object moves; velocity is its speed in a particular direction. Acceleration
is the rate at which velocity changes. So a car’s speed may be 40 miles per
hour; its velocity may be 40 miles per hour toward the north; and it may
accelerate by 10 feet per second until its velocity is 50 miles per hour to the
north. A force is anything that tends to change the state of rest or motion of
an object. A push or a pull on an object is a force, as are gravity and friction.
So, for example, if you allow a car to coast on a level road, the force of
friction will eventually bring it to a stop.
Sir Isaac Newton (1642–1727), an English physicist and mathematician, set
down three laws by which the planets and all other objects move when acted
upon by a force. These are called the laws of motion.
Newton’s first law of motion, the law of inertia, states that an object at rest
will stay at rest until a force acts upon it, and an object in motion will stay in
motion at a constant speed in a straight line until a force acts upon it. Objects
moving on Earth eventually slow down and stop because of the forces of
friction and gravity. A bullet, for example, would continue its forward motion
in a straight line, but friction from the air slows it down and the force of
gravity pulls it toward the ground.

GED® TEST TIP

If you are asked to apply a general law or principle of science
to a particular situation, ask yourself: “What is similar about
this situation and the general principle?”/p>
The second law of motion, sometimes called the law of motion or
acceleration, states that the acceleration of an object depends on its mass and
the force acting upon it. The greater the force, the greater the acceleration.
The more massive the object, the more force it takes to accelerate it.
Additionally, if a constant force acts upon an object, the object will move
with constant acceleration in the direction of the force. This is why truck
engines are more powerful than car engines: it takes more force to accelerate
an object with more mass (a truck) than an object with less mass (a car).
Newton’s third law of motion states that for every action, there is an equal
and opposite reaction. This law was used to derive the law of conservation of
momentum. Momentum is related to the amount of energy that a moving
object has, and it depends on the mass of the object and its velocity. In fact,
momentum is defined as an object’s mass multiplied by its velocity.
Newton’s third law states that when an object is given a certain amount of
momentum in a particular direction, some other object must receive an equal
momentum in the opposite direction. Another way to state this is to say that
all forces exist in pairs, and that all forces are interactions between objects.
So, for example, when a bullet is fired out of a gun, the bullet’s forward
momentum causes the gun to recoil, or move backward.

Practice 5
Questions 1 through 3 are based on page 560.
1. What is a force?
A. the rate at which an object moves in a particular direction
B. any change in an object’s acceleration or deceleration
C. the inertia and momentum of an object at rest
D. anything that changes the rest or motion of an object

2. What is inertia?
A. the speed at which an object is moving
B. changes in an object’s speed or direction
C. the force needed to move an object a certain distance
D. the tendency of an object to remain at rest or in motion
3. The force that is needed to keep an object mov-ing in a circular path is
called centripetal force.
Which of the following is an example of motion that requires centripetal
force?
A. the tides occurring as a result of the moon’s gravitational pull
B. the International Space Station orbiting Earth
C. a parachute slowing as it falls to the ground
D. a gun recoiling as a bullet is fired
4. Select the phrase from the choices below that correctly completes the
paragraph.
A car is traveling at a velocity of 30 miles per hour across a narrow bridge
when it is approached on a collision course by another car traveling at 30
miles per hour. The momentum of each car is propelling it forward, and
there is no way to completely avoid an impact. Because the momentum of
the car
, each driver should attempt to decrease his car’s speed
to lessen the severity of impact.
decreases when its velocity decreases
increases when its velocity decreases
decreases when its velocity increases
Question 5 refers to the following graph, the paragraph below, and the
information on page 560.
Graphs are often used to convey information about motion. One type of
motion graph shows distance and time. Distance is measured from a
particular starting point. If the distance graph has a straight, horizontal line,

the distance is unchanging and the object is not moving. If the distance graph
has a straight line with an upward slope, the distance is changing at a constant
rate; this means that the object is moving at a constant speed. If the distance
graph is a curve, the object is accelerating or decelerating, depending on the
shape of the curve.

5. What does the graph above show?
A. an object that is not moving
B. an object that has a constant speed
C. an object that is accelerating
D. an object that is decelerating
6. A machine is a device that transmits a force, changing the direction or size
of the force and doing work. The force applied to a machine is the effort
force; the force it overcomes is the load. Types of simple machines
include the inclined plane, wedge, lever, pulley, and wheel-and-axle.
Which of the following statements is supported by the information given?
A. The force a machine overcomes is called the effort force.
B. Work can be done only with machines.
C. Some machines simply change the direction of a force.
D. All machines change both the direction and size of a force.
Answers and explanations begin on page 709.

Lesson 6: Electricity and Magnetism

Key Ideas
Particles with like electric charges repel one another, and particles
with unlike electric charges attract one another.
The flow of electrons through a substance is called an electric current.
An electric current produces a magnetic field, and a moving magnetic
field produces an electric current.

As you recall from your study of atoms, electrons have a negative charge (-),
and protons have a positive charge (+). This electric charge causes them to
exert forces on one another. Particles with like charges repel one another, and
particles with unlike charges attract one another. Sometimes electrons are
temporarily pulled away from atoms, creating stationary areas of positive and
negative charge. This can happen when two objects, like a balloon and a rug,
are rubbed together, creating static electricity.
The movement of charged particles, usually electrons, is an electric current.
Direct current flows in one direction only, and it is used in battery-operated
devices. Alternating current flows back and forth rapidly, and it is used in
household wiring. A material that allows electrons to move freely from atom
to atom is called a conductor. Metals are good conductors. A material that
does not allow electrons to move freely from atom to atom is called an
insulator. Rubber and plastic are examples of insulators. Semiconductors
are substances whose ability to conduct electricity is midway between that of
a conductor and an insulator. Semiconductors like silicon are used in
electronic devices.

GED® TEST TIP
You can use your knowledge of everyday things like electricity
and motors to help you answer questions on the Science Test.
An electric current produces a magnetic field that affects magnetic

substances such as iron in the same way a permanent magnet does. Magnetic
fields are produced by moving charged particles. In an electromagnet, the
charged particles move along a coil of wire connected to a battery or other
power source. In a permanent magnet, the spinning of electrons creates a
magnetic field. Every magnet has two ends, called the north and south poles.
The north pole of one magnet attracts the south pole of another magnet; like
poles repel one another.

Just as an electric current produces a magnetic field, a moving magnetic field
produces an electric current. This principle underlies electric motors,
generators, and transformers. In an electric motor, for example, magnetic
fields are produced by electric currents. The magnetic fields push against one
another, turning the shaft of the motor. In a generator, a moving magnetic
field produces electric current. In a transformer, an incoming electric current
in coiled wire produces fluctuating magnetic fields, which in turn produce an
outgoing electric current of a different voltage. The difference in voltage is
caused by the differing sizes of the wire coils.

Practice 6

Questions 1 through 3 are based on page 562.
1. Suppose a drawing of two magnets with their north poles facing one
another were added to the diagram on page 562. What would the new
drawing show?
A. two poles attracting one another
B. two poles repelling one another
C. magnetic lines of force connecting the poles
D. magnetic lines of force flowing southward
2. What is the reason copper and aluminum are used for electrical wiring?
A. Copper and aluminum are conductors.
B. Copper and aluminum are insulators.
C. Copper and aluminum are semiconductors.
D. Copper and aluminum are magnetic.
3. Based on the information on page 562, which of the following devices is
most likely to use direct current?
A. a washing machine
B. a desktop computer
C. a toaster
D. a flashlight
4. In an electric power plant, generators may produce electric current at about
10,000 volts. The current may be stepped up and transmitted along high
voltage lines at 230,000 volts, and then stepped down to about 2,300 volts
for transmission in a city. Finally, before it enters houses, the current is
stepped down to 110 volts.
Based on the information above and that on page 562, which of the
following devices steps current up and down for efficient transmission?
A. a conductor
B. an electromagnet

C. an electric motor
D. a transformer
Questions 5 and 6 refer to the following paragraph and diagram.
An electric circuit is a complete pathway for the flow of electric current. It
consists of a source of electricity, such as a battery, wires along which the
current travels, devices called resistors powered by the current, and often a
switch to start and stop the flow of current.

5. Circle the element of the diagram that acts as a resistor in the circuit.
6. A student was asked how the current in the circuit shown above could be
stopped without using the switch. He answered that the only way to stop
the current was to disconnect the battery.
What was wrong with the student’s response?
A. Disconnecting the battery will not stop the current.
B. Removing the fuse will also stop the current.
C. Disconnecting the lightbulb will also stop the current.
D. There is no way to stop the current without using the switch.
Answers and explanations start on page 710.

Physical Science Practice Questions
Questions 1 and 2 refer to the following paragraph and chart.
When the nuclei of unstable elements disintegrate, emitting radioactive
radiation, the unstable elements change into other elements, becoming more
stable. The amount of time it takes for half of a sample of a radioactive
element to decay into its stable product is called the radioactive element’s
half-life.
Radioactive Decay
Radioactive Element

Decays into

Half-life

Radon-222

Polonium-218

3.82 days

Carbon-14

Nitrogen-14

5,730 years

Uranium-235

Lead-207

713 million years

Uranium-235

Lead-206

4.5 billion years

Rubidium-87

Strontium-87

50 billion years

1. What is the half-life of carbon-14?
A. 3.82 days
B. 5,730 years
C. 713 million years
D. 4.5 billion years
2. Uranium is used as fuel in nuclear power plants, resulting in radioactive
waste, which is dangerous to living things.
Which of the following arguments is likely to be used by opponents of
nuclear power?
A. Uranium is a plentiful source of fuel for generating electricity.
B. Uranium is a renewable resource, and therefore its use is limitless.

C. During the three days that radioactive waste is unstable, it may harm
living things.
D. Uranium produces radioactive waste that may harm living things for
millions of years.
Questions 3 and 4 refer to the following paragraph and diagram.
An oscillation is a back-and-forth or up-and- down movement. When an
oscillation travels through matter or space and transfers energy, it is called a
wave.

3. What is the main similarity between longitudinal and transverse waves?
A. Both involve up-and-down displacement of particles.
B. Both involve back-and-forth displacement of particles.
C. Both involve compressions in which particles are pushed together.
D. Both involve the transfer of energy through matter or space.
4. After a transverse wave passes through a substance, no particle ever ends
up far from its original position.
Which of the following illustrates this principle?
A. A cork in water bobs up and down as waves pass.
B. Sound waves travel through air.
C. When two waves overlap, they interfere with one another.

D. A stone dropped into a pond causes ripples to radiate outward.
5. According to the kinetic theory of matter, all matter is made up of
molecules in a state of constant motion. The motion of molecules can be
inferred by observing particles in a fluid (a liquid or a gas) as they are hit
by molecules of the fluid. The random, zigzag movement of the particles
is called Brownian motion.
Which of the following is an example of Brownian motion?
A. dust motes dancing in a shaft of sunlight
B. the ground vibrating as a truck passes
C. water evaporating from a puddle
D. an inflatable raft floating on a lake
6. In a chemical reaction, the surface area of the reactants affects the rate at
which the reaction occurs. The greater the surface area of the reactants,
the faster the reaction rate will be.
When dilute sulfuric acid reacts with marble, carbon dioxide gas is
produced. Among the options below, one will increase the rate of reaction,
and one will decrease the rate of reaction. Match the appropriate action to
the corresponding box for each effect—increasing and decreasing the rate
of reaction.
Increase Rate of Reaction

Decrease Rate of Reaction

Options:
Use a larger container.

Use a smaller container.

Use powdered marble.

Use larger chunks of marble.

7. Boyle’s law states that at a constant temperature, the volume of a fixed
amount of gas varies inversely with the pressure exerted on the gas.

Therefore, the volume of a gas
increases.

when the pressure on the gas

increases
decreases
remains the same
Questions 8 and 9 refer to the following paragraph and chart.
All of the elements are arranged in the periodic table according to atomic
number—the number of protons in an atom of each element. The rows of the
periodic table show elements according to the structure of their electron
orbits. The columns, or groups, show elements with similar properties. A
portion of the periodic table is shown below.

8. Group 18 is also called the noble gases. Their electron orbits are
completely filled, and they rarely react with other elements. Which of the
following is a noble gas?
A. nitrogen (N)
B. chlorine (Cl)
C. xenon (Xe)
D. fluorine (F)
9. Which of the following statements is supported by the information given?

A. Silicon (Si) is a very common element.
B. Chlorine (Cl) and iodine (I) have similar properties.
C. Arsenic (As) and antimony (Sb) have very different properties.
D. Arsenic (As) has 85 protons in its nucleus.
Questions 10 and 11 refer to the following paragraph and diagram.
Electromagnetic radiation consists of electric and magnetic fields that
oscillate back and forth. There is a wide range of types of electromagnetic
radiation, which together form the electromagnetic spectrum.

10. Which of the following types of electromagnetic radiation has a
wavelength longer than those in the visible spectrum?
A. microwaves
B. ultraviolet light
C. X-rays
D. colored light
11. Which of the following generalizations is supported by the diagram?
A. Unlike people, some insects can see ultraviolet light.
B. Warm colors like yellow have a shorter wavelength than cool colors
like blue.
C. People can see only a small portion of the electromagnetic spectrum.

D. In medicine, X-rays are used to make images of bones.
12. Objects are attracted to one another by the force of gravity. Gravity is
proportional to the mass—the amount of matter—objects have; gravity
decreases as the distance between the objects increases. An object’s
weight is a measurement of the Earth’s gravitational pull on the object.
What happens to the mass and weight of a rocket as it travels beyond
Earth’s orbit?
A. Its mass remains the same, and its weight increases.
B. Its mass remains the same, and its weight decreases.
C. Its mass decreases, and its weight decreases.
D. Its mass increases, and its weight remains the same.
13. Heat energy can be transferred from one object to another. In summer,
when you hold an ice-cold can of soda against your face, your face feels
cooler. However, what is really happening is that the can is being warmed
by heat from your body. You are actually losing a little body heat.
Which of the following is an unstated assumption related to the paragraph?
A. Heat can be transferred.
B. Coldness cannot be transferred.
C. A cool object can be warmed by your body.
D. You can lose body heat.
Questions 14 and 15 refer to the following table and paragraph. You
MAY use your calculator.
An aviation engineer tests five newly developed airplanes by measuring and
recording the top speed of each plane. Unbeknownst to the engineer, the
radar she used to measure the planes’ speeds is faulty: it gives the speed of
any object in motion as 3.7 km/hour faster than it really is. The following
table shows the speeds that the engineer recorded using the faulty radar and
the actual speed of each plane:

Airplane

Recorded speed
(km/hour)

Actual speed (km/hour)

1

214.4

210.7

2

362.1

358.4

3

410.0

406.3

4

214.4

210.7

5

359.6

355.9

Using the speeds recorded from the faulty radar, the engineer then calculated
the mean, median, mode, and range of the planes’ speeds.
14. Which one of the engineer’s calculations using the recorded speed is
identical to what it would have been had the engineer made the same
calculation using the actual speed of each plane?
A. the mean
B. the median
C. the mode
D. the range
15. After completing her measurements, the engineer selects at random two
planes to demonstrate at an upcoming air show. What is the probability
that the actual speeds of both planes selected are less than 360 km/hour?
A.
B.
C.
D.
16. Proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) are alternative energyconverting devices that use hydrogen as fuel. Researchers examined the
effect of adding a layer of hydrogen-storable polymer (HSP) to a fuel cell.

The results are shown in the graph.

What conclusion can be drawn from the graph?
A. The PEMFC without HSP generated more power than the PEMFC
with HSP.
B. The difference in power between the two PEMFCs increased over
time.
C. The rate of change in power of the PEMFC with HSP was constant
over time.
D. Power increased over time for both PEMFCs.
Answers and explanations start on page 710.

GED® Practice Tests
1. To practice for the actual GED® Tests, you can take the following four
tests. When you take the tests, follow the same time limits you will
face on the actual tests.
Reasoning through Language Arts, 53 Questions and Extended
Response, 2.5 Hours, Pages 570–591
First Section—30 minutes: reading and language skills
Second Section—45 minutes: extended written response to two
passages
Break—10 minutes
Third Section—65 minutes: reading and language skills
Mathematical Reasoning, 46 Questions, 1 Hour, 55 Minutes,
Pages 593–605
First Section—no calculator allowed
Second Section—calculator allowed
Social Studies, 34 Questions, 1 Hour, 10 Minutes, Pages 606–617
Science, 36 Questions, 1.5 Hours, Pages 618–629
Just as on the actual tests, you will work with a variety of formats:
For the multiple-choice questions, you may fill in the circles next
to the correct answers in this book, or you can write your answers on
a separate piece of paper.
For other formats, directions will indicate where you can write in
boxes, write on lines, or place a dot on a specific place on a graphic.
You can write Short Answers on the Science Test and the
Extended Response on the Reasoning through Language Arts Test
on a computer or, if one is not available, on a sheet of paper.
NOTE: Writing your responses on a computer is preferable because
you will be composing your responses on a computer when you take
the GED® Test. However, if you do not have a computer available
when you take these tests, write your responses on paper so that you
can evaluate your writing samples.

2. You MAY use your calculator beginning on page 595 of the
Mathematics Test and as needed during the Science and Social Studies
Tests.
3. Check your answers using the Practice Test Answers and Explanations
that begin on page 712 and fill in the Practice Test Evaluation Charts.
These charts will allow you to see which study areas may still need
work.
4. Confirm your readiness to take the actual GED® Test.

Reasoning through Language Arts Practice
Test
Directions: Use 30 minutes to answer the following 20 questions. You may
fill in the circles next to the correct answers or write your answers in boxes or
on lines as indicated. Some of the questions in this section mimic the GED
test’s drop-down menu question format. Wherever the word “Select” appears,
choose the option that best completes the passage.
Questions 1 through 6 refer to the following excerpt from an article.
Excerpted from “Sizing Up the Interviewer”
1

It is intrinsic to human nature to take the
measure of the people we meet. We do it all
the time, automatically. We develop an
instinctive way of reading others that is
sometimes the saving of us and at other
times can prove to be our undoing. It is this
instinct that makes us form instant, lifelong
relationships with some people or causes
us to give a wide berth to others because
we get a “funny” feeling about them. With
some careful consideration and planning,

though, these “feelings” can be honed into
a useful tool for gauging the personality and
character of interviewers and, by extension,
their expectations of potential employees.
Let’s examine some clues.
2

Their e-mail. You can tell a lot about
your interviewer by his or her e-mail messages.
Some interviewers are very warm,
writing in a conversational style, addressing
you by your first name. Others are witty,
mixing little jokes and humorous remarks in
with job-related questions. Still others get
right down to business—no chit-chat or
informality. Before you ever meet the interviewer,
you begin to form certain “pictures”
of the person, based on his or her approach
and style. But it still remains for you to
check him or her out face-to-face.
3 Their office. Let’s begin with the physical
setting of interviewers’ offices. Some
put a desk the size of a 747 between themselves
and you. This is a clear message to
you to keep your distance. A straightbacked,
rigid chair for the applicant says,
“O.K. Let’s get down to business, and then
you leave so I can get back to mine.” Here,
you would be advised to adopt a crisp,
businesslike style, with brief, professional
answers. And, for heaven’s sake, don’t
touch that desk!
4 Then, there is the homey, comfortable
environment—kids’ pictures on the desk,

executive “toys” around, soft chairs, and a
sofa. There may not even be a desk
between the applicant and the interviewer,
but rather two chairs grouped around a
coffee table. This environment invites more
intimacy. It says, “Be yourself. Tell me about
who you are so I can get to know you.”
Here, your manner, though still professional,
should be relaxed and open, more personable.
It would be a mistake with this
employer to sit ramrod straight and give
cool, truncated responses to the questions.
by Fred Jandt and Mary Nemnich, Indianapolis: JIST Works.

1. The purpose of this article is to
A. raise awareness about incompetent interviewers
B. describe types of interviewers and how to approach them
C. guarantee a perfect interview with an employer
D. explain how to email an interviewer
2. Which of the following is a generalization made in paragraph 1 but NOT
supported with evidence?
A. Your “feelings” can be honed into a useful tool for gauging the
personality and character of interviewers.
B. An interviewer’s office can tell you a great deal about that
interviewer.
C. Our ability to “read” others makes us form instant, lifelong
relationships with some people.
D. There is more than one type of clue you can use to gauge the
personality of your interviewer.

3. Which of the following are contrasted in this passage?
A. interviewers who welcome questions about themselves and those
who do not
B. interviewers who frequently use email and interviewers who do not
C. interviewers who ask difficult questions and interviewers who ask
very few questions
D. interviewers with homey, comfortable offices and interviewers
whose offices seem less welcoming
4. Which of the following is an assumption the author of this passage
makes?
A. Interviewers have some influence or control over their office
arrangements.
B. Because email can be impersonal, it is a poor way to communicate
with a potential employer.
C. Managers who enjoy chatting informally with employees never have
large desks in the middle of their offices.
D. In preparing for a job interview, it is more important to “read” your
interviewer than to research the company where you have applied to
work.
5. Arrange the following boxes in order from first to last in the order they
appear in the passage.
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
A. The author claims that an interviewer’s email style tells you
something about that interviewer.

B. The author claims that the arrangement of an interviewer’s office
tells you something about that interviewer.
C. The author makes a generalization about how your ability to “read”
an interviewer can be useful.
D. The author cites specific evidence about why an interviewer’s email
style may be helpful to you.
6. Which of the following best summarizes the author’s main point?
A. You should never respond to an interviewer who expects crisp
answers with a rambling story about yourself.
B. You should focus on details when attempting to understand your
interviewer, since details are important.
C. You should help your interviewer get to know you during the
interview and beforehand.
D. You should try to understand your interviewer’s personality and
tailor your
responses to him or her accordingly.
Questions 7 through 12 refer to the following excerpt from a short story.
Excerpted from The Living Is Easy
1

He gave them each a copper, too,
though he could hardly spare it, what with
four of them to feed and Mama wanting
yard goods and buttons and ribbons to
keep herself feeling proud of the way she
kept her children. Time was, he gave them
kisses for toting his bucket. But the day
Cleo brazenly said, I don’t want a kiss, I
want a copper, the rest of them shamefacedly
said it after her. Most times Pa had
a struggle to dig down so deep. Four coppers

2

3

4

5
6
7

a day, six days a week, was half a
day’s pay gone up in smoke for candy.
Pa couldn’t bring himself to tell Mama.
She would have wrung out of him that Cleo
had been the one started it. And Cleo was
his eldest. A man who loved his wife
couldn’t help loving his first-born best, the
child of his fiercest passion. When that firstborn
was a girl, she could trample on his
heart, and he would swear on a stack of
Bibles that it didn’t hurt.
The sisters put their coppers in their
pinafore pockets and skipped back through
the woods. Midway Cleo stopped and
pointed to a towering oak. “You all want to
bet me a copper I can’t swing by my feet
from up in that tree?”
Lily clapped her hands to her eyes. “I
doesn’t want to bet you,” she implored. “I
ain’t fixing to see you fall.”
Serena said severely, “You bust your
neck, you see if Mama don’t bust it again.”
Charity said tremulously, “Cleo, what
would us do if our sister was dead?”
Cleo saw herself dressed up fine as
Josie Beauchamp, stretched out in a coffin
with her sisters sobbing beside it, and Pa
with his Sunday handkerchief holding his
tears, and Mama crying, I loved you best,
Cleo. I never said it when you were alive.
And I’m sorry, sorry, I waited to say it after
you were gone.

8

“You hold my copper, Charity. And if I
die, you can have it.”
9
Lily opened two of her fingers and
peeped through the crack. “Cleo, I’ll give
you mine if you don’t make me see you
hanging upside down.” It was one thing to
hear Cleo tell about herself. It was another
thing to see her fixing to kill herself.
10 “Me, too,” said Serena, with a little sob,
more for the copper than for Cleo, whom
she briefly hated for compelling unnecessary
sacrifice.
Dorothy West, excerpt from The Living is Easy. Copyright 1948,© 1975 by Dorothy West. Reprinted
with the permission of The Permissions Company, Inc., on behalf of The Feminist Press at the City
University of New York, www.feministpress.org.

7. Which of the following would Cleo probably enjoy?
A. jumping from a roof before an audience
B. sewing clothes with her mother
C. reading a good book
D. treating her sisters to candy
8. Whose point of view is explained by this quote from paragraph 2? “A
man who loved his wife couldn’t help loving his first-born best, the child
of his fiercest passion.”
A. Cleo’s
B. Mama’s
C. the narrator’s
D. Pa’s
9. Arrange the following plot elements in order from the earliest to the
latest.

1st
2nd
3rd
4th
A. Cleo envisions her own funeral.
B. Cleo’s sisters offer her their coppers.
C. One day Cleo said that she did not want a kiss but wanted a copper
instead.
D. Cleo asks her sisters to bet on whether she can swing from her feet
in an oak tree.
10. Why did Serena offer Cleo her own copper?
A. Serena wanted Cleo to get in trouble for taking the others’ money.
B. Serena had placed a bet that Cleo could not swing from the oak tree.
C. Serena felt that she had no choice but to give Cleo her copper to stop
Cleo from doing something unsafe.
D. Serena wanted to show how much she loved her sister.
11. What is meant by the following quote from paragraph 1? “Most times Pa
had a struggle to dig down so deep.”
A. It was difficult for Pa to find it within himself to be generous.
B. Pa had so few coins that they were usually far down in his pockets.
C. Pa often searched for reasons not to give coppers to Cleo and her
sisters.
D. Pa could not really afford to give Cleo and her sisters money.
12. Which of the following statements best describes the theme of the
passage?
A. Cleo is wrong to take advantage of her sisters and her father.

B. Cleo’s boldness and her family’s love for her sometimes make them
feel powerless to resist her.
C. Cleo’s longing to be loved makes her vulnerable.
D. Cleo and her sisters are becoming greedy as they learn how to
extract money from each other and from their parents.
Questions 13 through 16 refer to the following paragraphs.
Painting a Room
Would you like to redecorate a room in your home? Painting
new look. First, remove the furniture, or move it to the center of the room and
cover it with drop cloths. Prepare the room by
a coat of primer if
necessary.
Now you’re ready to paint. Use a brush to paint a clean line along all edges
where paint stops, such as where the wall meets the door frame, and in places
where the ceiling meets a wall of a different color. This is called “cutting in.”
The next step
to paint the room in the following order: ceiling,
walls, trim, doors, and windows. Put no more than 3/4 of an inch of paint in
the paint pan. Run your roller through the paint, being careful not to overload
the roller. Apply paint to the ceiling and walls in a “W” or “Z” zigzag pattern.
Spread the paint evenly by rolling either side to side or up and down, using
gentle strokes so as not to leave roller marks. After finishing an area, look for
spots you
over them with your relatively dry roller.
13. Painting

new look.

A. is a fast inexpensive way to give that room a hole
B. are a fast, and inexpensive way to give that room a whole
C. is a fast and inexpensive way to giving that room a whole
D. is a fast and inexpensive way to give that room a whole
14. Prepare the room by

a coat of primer if line break necessary.

A. stripping paint and excess wallpaper, fill cracks, and add

B. strip paint and wallpaper, fill cracks, and add
C. stripping paint and wallpaper, fill cracks, and adding
D. stripping paint and wallpaper, filling cracks, and adding
15. The next step
to paint the room in the following order:
ceiling, walls, trim, doors, and windows.
A. was
B. being
C. is
D. had been
16. After finishing an area, look for spots you
your relatively dry roller.

over them with

A. missed, and go
B. missed, and going
C. missed go
D. missed, but go
Questions 17 through 20 refer to the following passage.
Starting a Community Garden
(A)
(1) In many cities, neighborhood groups are
forming community gardens in vacant lots, in parks, or on rooftops. (2) These
gardens
to work with nature while making the neighborhood
more beautiful. (3) If you
people are truly interested in the
project. (4) If they are, organize a meeting of interested people, and choose
someone to be the garden coordinator.
(5) Form committees for tasks like finding money for the garden.
(B)

(6) Once your group is organized, approach a sponsor—a group or
individual who can support your garden. (7) Keep in mind that contributions
of seeds, tools, and land are just as important as money. (8) Schools,
churches, citizen groups, and private businesses are all
potential sponsors.
(C)
(9) Find out how the land has been used in the past to avoid places that
may be contaminated. (10) Pick a site that gets at least six hours of direct
sunlight a day, and make sure that
water is available. (11) Contact the owner of the site try to get a lease that
allows you to use the land for at least three years.
(D)
(12) After choosing a site, the group of gardeners needs to decide how to
organize the garden. (13) What size should each plot be, and how will plots
be assigned? (14) Finally, establish a procedure to follow so that the garden
stays tidy and peaceful.
17. These gardens
to work with nature while making the
neighborhood more beautiful.
A. is an ideal way for both children, and adults
B. are an ideal way for both children and adults
C. are an ideal way for both children, and adults,
D. ideal, since both children and adults
18. If you

people are truly interested in the project.

A. will like to start a community garden, first determine whether
B. would like to start a community garden, first determine whether
C. would like to start a community garden first determine whether
D. would like to start a community garden, first determine weather

19. Which sentence would be most effective if inserted at the beginning of
paragraph C?
A. Next, choose a site for the garden.
B. Land use is a very significant factor.
C. We all know that you are going to need land for your garden.
D. Learn about the history of your site.
20. Which of the following would improve the effectiveness of paragraph A?
A. Start a new paragraph before
sentence 2.
B. Start a new paragraph before
sentence 3.
C. Combine sentences 2 and 3 into a compound sentence.
D. Combine paragraphs A and B.
Directions: Based on both passages on pages 578 and 579, write a response
to the prompt on page 579. This task may take up to 45 minutes to complete.
Passage A: Why Physical Education Should No Longer Be
a Requirement for Graduation
This is the text of Councilwoman Juanita Sanchez’s speech
at last week’s school board meeting.
The job market is increasingly competitive. Because of this, we must ensure
that our students’ education fully prepares them to succeed in the future. A
limited budget and limited time during the school day force us to make
difficult decisions concerning what we teach. We must be willing to make
these decisions with the best interests of our students at heart. With these
goals in mind, I support the proposal to eliminate physical education as a core
requirement for high school graduation in our district.
Time spent completing physical education requirements is time away from
more productive educational pursuits. While our state’s standardized test

scores have continued to rise in past years, we are still seeing results that are
below average in both mathematics and reading. Added instructional time is
necessary to see our test scores meet the standards set for us. This additional
time spent on core subjects will also better prepare students for a pursuit of
higher education after high school graduation.
No one is suggesting that physical education and fitness classes be
completely eliminated from our curriculum. Physical education is a
worthwhile pursuit and should be provided for those students who are
interested. But it should be an elective, or optional, course in the same way
that music, art, and theater classes are offered as electives. Thus, this outdated
requirement will no longer get in the way of more academically important
pursuits.
Passage B: Physical Education Is an Important Requirement for
Students
Letter from concerned parent published in the City Journal newspaper
No one would disagree that preparing our students for a successful future is
essential. Changes need to be made in order to help our children compete for
college scholarships and career advancement. But as we make these changes,
we have to be careful not to cause more harm than good. The current
proposal places us in danger of damaging successful programs in our efforts
to make improvements.
Having a healthy lifestyle is at least as important to a happy and successful
future as mathematics and reading skills are. We currently are in the middle
of an epidemic of health problems caused by lack of physical fitness among
the children in our community. In our state, almost 20 percent of children
between the ages of 12 and 18 are classified as obese. And obesity is linked
to a number of life threatening health problems including diabetes and heart
disease. Thus, this is a trend that we must make every effort to reverse.
Programs to offer healthier lunch choices for students have already been
introduced. It would be ridiculous to now eliminate requirements that teach
our children about other aspects of healthy living. What good is longer time
spent in so-called “core classes” if students aren’t healthy enough to fully

participate?
I understand that the School Board members have students’ best interests at
heart. And I agree that it is important to find ways to improve the math and
reading scores of our students. Unfortunately, the current plan to eliminate
physical education will do much more harm than good. There is a reason P.E.
has been a part of our school curriculum for so many years!

Write an Extended Response to Both Passages
While Councilwoman Sanchez makes her case for the benefits of
eliminating physical education from the required curriculum, the
editorial response identifies the drawbacks of this proposal.
In your response, analyze both the speech and the editorial. Explain
which position you believe is best supported by its advocate. Use
relevant and specific evidence from both sources to support your
response.
Type your response on a computer, if one is available. If one is not
available, write your response neatly on paper. This task may require
approximately 45 minutes to complete.
Use the Reasoning through Language
Arts Extended Response Evaluation
Guide on page 730 to evaluate your
response.

You may take a 10-minute break before proceeding.

Directions: Use 65 minutes to answer the following questions. You may fill
in the circles next to the correct answers or write your answers in boxes or on
lines as indicated.

Questions 21 through 27 refer to the following book excerpt.
Excerpted from Small Business for Dummies
1

The domestic automakers had a huge
market share coming into the 1970s but,
unfortunately, were upsetting customers left
and right. The Detroit auto manufacturers
were able to keep their costs low and profits
high in part by producing sub-par cars.
Sure, their cars looked nice on the auto
dealer’s lot, but after a short time in use,
many of the U.S.-manufactured cars developed
far more problems than their foreign
equivalents. And, to add insult to injury,
U.S. auto customers didn’t get particularly
good customer service when they brought
their cars in for needed tune-ups and
repairs.
2 The chief bean counters and the management
of the major U.S. automakers
weren’t considering the bigger picture when
they analyzed their companies’ financial
statements during the 1970s. These companies
were too focused on their short-term
profitability and weren’t considering the
after-sales service that was required as a
result of their initially shoddy products.
3 Not surprisingly, the U.S. automakers
lost tremendous market share at the
expense of the best foreign automakers
during the 1970s and 1980s. In fact, one of

the big four U.S. automakers—Chrysler—
nearly went bankrupt and was saved only
because of a government bailout.
4 In the long run, the Detroit automakers
learned the hard way that getting your
product right the first time is less costly
and more profitable than retrenching to play
catch-up. Customers aren’t stupid, and if
you continually sell them shoddy merchandise
(especially when better merchandise is
available from other sources), they won’t
come back the next time they’re in the market
for the products and services you have
to offer. What’s more, they’ll tell others of
their lousy experience with your company.
5 Although the major U.S. automakers
ultimately got their act together in the
1990s and have stopped the erosion of
market share, they still feel the financial
pain from the millions of customers they
alienated and lost to foreign competitors in
the two preceding decades.
From Small Business for Dummies by Eric Tyson and Jim Schell, Foster City, Calif.: IDG Books, 2000.

21. The passage states that in the 1970s and 1980s, the management of the
major U.S. automakers was too focused on which of the following?
A. attractiveness of the cars they manufactured
B. after-sales service
C. manufacturing shoddy merchandise
D. short-term profitability

22. According to the passage, which of the following is a lesson learned by
the Detroit automakers?
A. Getting your product right the first time is more profitable than
fixing mistakes later.
B. Servicing your product is not profitable and therefore unimportant.
C. Bankruptcy is profitable for large companies due to government
bailouts.
D. It is easy to win back customers a company has lost to a competitor.
23. What do the authors suggest was one of the goals of foreign automakers?
Foreign automakers
A. studied and then improved on the design of U.S. cars
B. deliberately underpriced their cars to get a share of the U.S. market
C. wanted to build quality cars with few repair problems
D. put short-term profitability above all else
24. The author uses the phrase “chief bean counters” most probably in order
to
A. underscore the fact that customers will not return once they have
had a poor experience with a certain company
B. argue that foreign automakers provided
better customer service than U.S. automakers
C. emphasize U.S. automakers’ preoccupation with keeping costs low
and profits high in the short term, at the
expense of their long-term outlook
D. indicate that domestic automakers enjoyed tremendous market share
at the beginning of the 1970s
25. Which of the following are causes, and which are effects? Place the
following four causes and effects into the table below:

Causes

Effects

A. U.S. automakers manufactured cars of low quality.
B. A customer chooses not to do business with a company.
C. A customer has a bad experience when doing business with a
company.
D. U.S. automakers lost business to foreign automakers in the 1970s
and 1980s.
26. Which of the following best describes the authors’ tone toward U.S.
automakers?
A. critical
B. proud
C. approving
D. arrogant
27. Later, the authors advise: “As a small-business owner, remember that if
you don’t get your product right the first time, you may not have a second
chance.”
Based on this information and the excerpt, who did get a second chance?
A. U.S. automakers
B. foreign automakers
C. small-business owners
D. the government
Questions 28 through 34 refer to the following passage from a short story.

Excerpted from “The Twins”
1

After a while, there was a ring at the
back door. The children scampered in from
the garden, while Jennie answered the ring.
2
“Baker,” said the man.
3
“Oh, yes,” said Jennie: “wait, I’ll get my
purse.”
4
I went on writing my letter, only half
hearing the sound of Jennie’s small-change
as she, presumably, paid the baker’s man.
5
In a moment, Marjie was by my side.
6
“Hallo,” I said.
7
Marjie did not answer.
8
“Hallo, Marjie,” I said. “Have you come
to keep me company?”
9
“Listen,” said little Marjie in a whisper,
looking over her shoulder. “Listen.”
10 “Yes,” I said.
11 She looked over her shoulder again, as if
afraid her mother might come in.
12 “Will you give me half-a-crown?” whispered
Marjie, holding out her hand.
13 “Well,” I said, “what do you want it for?”
14 “I want it,” said Marjie, looking furtively
behind her again.
15 “Would your mummy want you to have
it?” I said.
16 “Give me half-a-crown,” said Marjie.
17 “I’d rather not,” I said. “But I’ll tell you
what, I’ll buy you a—”
18 But Marjie had fled, out of the door, into

the kitchen. “She’d rather not,” I heard her
say to someone.
19 Presently, Jennie came in, looking upset.
20 “Oh,” she said, “I hope you didn’t feel
hurt. I only wanted to pay the baker, and I
hadn’t enough change. He hadn’t any either;
so just on the spur of the moment I sent
Marjie for a loan of half-a-crown till tonight.
But I shouldn’t have done it. I never borrow
anything as a rule.”
21 “Well, of course!” I said. “Of course I’ll
lend you half-a-crown. I’ve got plenty of
change. I didn’t understand and I got the
message all wrong; I thought she wanted it
for herself and that you wouldn’t like that.”
22 Jennie looked doubtful. I funked explaining
the whole of Marjie’s act. It isn’t easy to
give evidence against a child of five.
23 “Oh, they never ask for money,” said
Jennie. “I would never allow them to ask for
anything. They never do that.”
24 “I’m sure they don’t,” I said, floundering
a bit.
By Muriel Spark, from ALL THE STORIES OF MURIEL SPARK, copyright © 1953, 1957, 1958,
1961, 1964, 1967, 1985, 1987, 1989, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997 by Muriel Spark. Copyright © 1985 by
Copyright Administration Limited. Reprinted by permission of New Directions Publishing Corp.

28. What does Marjie’s looking over her shoulder suggest to the narrator?
The narrator thinks Marjie
A. is imagining what she’ll do with the money
B. has forgotten something in the other room

C. is shy and lacks confidence
D. is hoping her mother won’t hear her asking for money
29. Which of the following becomes evident during the discussion between
Jennie and the narrator?
A. Jennie knows the narrator wanted to lend her the money.
B. Jennie can’t believe that the narrator wouldn’t lend her the money.
C. Jennie is perplexed when the narrator blames Marjie.
D. The narrator and Jennie eventually forget the misunderstanding.
30. If Jennie were criticized by her boss at work, what would she most likely
do?
A. resent it in silence
B. discuss it defensively
C. not take it seriously
D. argue forcefully
31. The first person point of view allows the reader to know
A. the narrator’s thoughts
B. the thoughts and actions of all characters
C. only the actions of the narrator
D. Marjie’s opinions about the narrator
32. What kind of relationship do Jennie and the narrator have?
A. They are cool and indifferent to each other.
B. They frequently disagree on matters.
C. They know each other but are not close.
D. Jennie takes advantage of the narrator.
33. Which of the following best describes the situation presented in this

excerpt?
A. humorous
B. sad
C. uncomfortable
D. sentimental
34. Match the following descriptions with the characters they best describe.
Marjie
Jennie
Narrator
Obedient
Diplomatic
Proud
Questions 35 through 41 refer to the following passage and graphic.
How Should We Measure the
Rate of Poverty?
1

The rate of poverty appears to be
increasing. Each year, the U.S. Census
Bureau estimates the rate of poverty, or how
many people in the U.S. are living in poverty.
According to the Census Bureau, about 15.9
percent of the U.S. population was poor in
2011. That was a 15.3 percent increase over
2010. Moreover, the rate of poverty rose
each year from 2007 to 2011.
2 It has been argued that the estimated

rate of poverty is too low—that, in fact,
more Americans are poor. To understand
this, it is important first to understand how
the Census Bureau determines who is
poor. The Bureau surveys people about
their income and then compares that
income to the official “poverty threshold”
(often called the “poverty line”). This poverty
threshold varies depending on age,
family size, and number of children. For
example, in 2011 the poverty threshold for
a single individual under 65 was $11,702.
For a family of four, it was $23,021.
3 Some researchers have argued that these
poverty thresholds do not account for taxes,
living expenses, medical costs, or differences
in cost of living. For example, in a major city,
higher rents may leave individuals with less
money for food. If the poverty thresholds
were adjusted to account for these considerations,
the estimated rate of poverty might
be higher.
4 A panel of experts has proposed a different
measure of poverty, which they call the
Supplemental Poverty Measure, or SPM.
The graph below shows what percentage of
people are living in poverty as measured by
the official poverty threshold and compares
it to the percentage of people who would be
considered poor by the SPM.
5 Why does it matter how many people are
considered poor by the Census Bureau?

One answer is that the Bureau’s estimate of
the rate of poverty is used by the federal
government to allot resources to states and
local communities. Local governments also
use the estimate to figure out how many
people are eligible for anti-poverty programs.

35. Which of the following best states the main idea of the passage and
graph?
A. The Census Bureau uses a set of poverty thresholds to determine the
rate of poverty.
B. If the Census Bureau adopted the SPM, the estimate of the rate of
poverty among seniors would increase.
C. There may be more people in poverty than the Census Bureau
official estimate suggests.

D. It is important that the government take action to combat poverty.
36. Which of the following is a supporting detail, rather than a main idea, in
paragraph 1?
A. The rate of poverty rose each year from 2007 to 2011.
B. The rate of poverty appears to be increasing.
C. The Census Bureau may underestimate the number of people living
in poverty.
D. Differences in cost of living should be accounted for in how the
government measures poverty.
37. How does the bar graph support the information in the passage?
A. The bar graph supports the claim that some people who do not think
they are poor may actually be poor.
B. The bar graph supports the claim that the government should do
more to combat poverty.
C. The bar graph supports the claim that a different way to measure
poverty would produce a different estimate of the rate of poverty.
D. The bar graph supports the claim that 15.9% of people in the U.S.
were poor
in 2011.
38. Which of the following describes a cause and effect relationship
mentioned in the passage?
A. The poverty thresholds cause individuals to have lower income.
B. The Census Bureau’s estimated rate of poverty can cause
government officials to care about poverty.
C. Higher rents can cause people to have less money for food.
D. The SPM would cause more money to be spent on programs for
senior citizens.
39. Place each of the factors below into the column that best describes it. You

may or may not fill up each column.
Estimates that would be higher if the
SPM were adopted

Estimates that would be
lower if the SPM were
adopted

the overall rate of poverty
the rate of poverty among people 65 and older
the rate of poverty among people under 18
the rate of poverty among people 18–64
40. A student reviewed this passage and graph and then said: “It’s clear to me
that if the Census Bureau adopted the SPM, then local governments
would get significantly more federal money to spend on anti-poverty
programs.” Which of the following best describes the flaw in the
student’s reasoning?
A. The student has confused the causes of poverty with the effects of
poverty.
B. The student has overlooked the fact that other factors might impact
how much money local governments receive from the federal
government.
C. The student has overlooked the possibility that not all local
governments work to combat poverty.
D. The student has overlooked the fact that other countries have even
higher rates of poverty.
41. This piece was most likely written by someone who ________________.
A. worries that the government spends too much money on anti-

poverty programs
B. thinks poverty is too emotional a topic to be discussed publicly
C. wants governmental actions to be based on an accurate estimate of
the rate of poverty
D. thinks that there is little that government can do about poverty
Directions: Questions 42 through 45 refer to the following two passages.
Glenwood Community Improvement Council Member:
As a member of the Glenwood Community Improvement Council, I fully
support spending money to beautify our public parks. Over the last few years,
several of our community parks have fallen into disrepair. Walking paths
through the parks are not clearly marked, graffiti is visible on picnic shelters,
and garden areas are overgrown with weeds. My neighbors tell me that they
do not visit our parks because of the parks’ condition. Some even said that
they worry the parks are dangerous! We should spend money to ensure that
our parks are good places to spend time with your family.
Improving and maintaining the parks would have a positive effect on crime
and vandalism. If the parks are established as a source of pride for all of the
community, vandals will be less likely to deface them. Well-maintained
basketball and volleyball courts, picnic areas, and special events such as
concerts in the parks would provide activities for the whole town and help
neighbors spend time together.
Furthermore, beautiful public spaces are essential to community pride.
Without community pride, Glenwood residents and others are unlikely to
invest in creating and supporting small businesses. And small businesses are
the heart of a thriving community. We must present Glenwood as a beautiful
place to live in order to attract successful entrepreneurs from the surrounding
area. If we do so, our investment in the parks will quickly pay for itself. Thus,
we must improve our public parks.
Concerned Local Business Owner:
I think I speak for most of the business owners in Glenwood when I say
that spending money to improve parks would be a complete waste of

resources. The parks are not popular, and we do not know that they would
become popular after being improved.
If we want a shining example of our town’s successes to attract businesses,
our growing business district is all we need! In the last four years, six new
businesses have moved into vacant locations on Main Street. On top of that,
several restaurants and shops downtown have survived the recent economic
downturn and are now seeing more customers.
The city should do more to support these businesses. We should spend
money to improve the infrastructure and appearance of the downtown
business district. Improvements could be made to streetlights, signs, and
building exteriors along our historic Main Street. We also currently are not
able to plant public flower beds or clean and maintain the sidewalks.
Investments in
these areas would make downtown inviting to both customers and small
business owners.
Beautifying our town is important if we want economic growth. But we
should make sure that our beautification efforts are in the most important
places. Clearly, beautifying downtown would help us build a healthy local
economy. And once we have done so, then we can put money toward our
parks.
42. The topic of both passages is
A. the best way to enjoy public spaces
B. what businesses should exist in Glenwood
C. whether beautification projects create economic growth
D. how best to spend public money
43. The writers of the passages disagree about
which of the following claims about Glenwood Public Parks?
A. They are in a state of disrepair.
B. They are a current source of pride for the community.
C. Improving them is a good use of funds right now.
D. Park activities can lower the amount of crime.

44. How does the local business owner feel about projects that improve the
appearance of the city?
A. They are good when done in the best locations.
B. They are always a waste of taxpayer money.
C. The city parks are good enough the way they are.
D. They have no impact on local business.
45. Which of the following would the two writers most likely agree on?
A. Improving Glenwood Public Parks will have an immediate impact
on local business.
B. Investing in our community is important for the future of Glenwood.
C. The parks would be used regularly if they were in better repair.
D. Public activities are more important than encouraging new local
business.
Questions 46 through 49 refer to the following paragraphs.
Sick Building Syndrome
Do you
Do you experience symptoms such as coughing,
sneezing, nausea, headaches and difficulty breathing? Do these
If so, you may be working in a sick building.
“Sick building syndrome” is a term that refers to working in a building that
makes you sick. The syndrome may be caused by improper building design.
Over the past 20 years, architects have designed office buildings with an eye
to saving energy. The buildings are tightly sealed so that little heat escapes,
and the air inside the buildings is recirculated to avoid the cost of heating
fresh air. Although this design reduces energy costs, the lack of ventilation
causes a buildup of toxins in the air. On the other hand,
the
syndrome. Even if
originally opened to let in fresh air, adding
insulation, caulking, and weather stripping at a later date may have made the
windows airtight.
Toxins in the air come from a variety of sources. Biological agents,

including bacteria, viruses, fungi, and pollen, may be found in poorly
maintained air circulation systems and dirty washrooms. The deadly gas
carbon monoxide can seep into a building’s air through an improperly
ventilated garage or a leaky duct. Formaldehyde is frequently found in
furniture, paneling, draperies, glues, and upholstery.
It is possible to “cure” a sick building. Steps to take include eliminating
tobacco smoke, providing good ventilation, keeping the ventilation system in
good repair, and removing all sources of pollution.
46. Do you
A. often feel sick when at you’re workplace?
B. often feel sickly when at your workplace?
C. often feel sick when at your workplace?
D. often feeling sick when at your workplace?
47. Do these
A. symptoms seem to disappear magically once you leave work?
B. symptoms seem to disappear once you leave work magically?
C. symptoms seems to disappear once you leave work magically?
D. symptoms seem to disappear once magically you leave work?
48. On the other hand,

the syndrome.

A. an older building isn’t necessarily immune to
B. an older isn’t necessarily immune to
C. an older isn’t necessarily immune too
D. an older building isn’t necessarily immune, to
49. Even if
originally opened to let in fresh air, adding
insulation, caulking, and weather stripping at a later date may have made
the windows airtight.
A. them

B. it
C. the building
D. the windows
Questions 50 through 53 refer to the following flyer.
Save Compton Point!
(A)
(1) Compton Point, home to many animal species that are threatened with
extinction, now faces a threat of its own. (2) Developers are attempting to
change the zoning in order to build a hotel, a tourist center, and an
observation tower. (3) If they succeed in getting the rights to build,
construction will begin next August.
(B)
(4) Sam Wanamaker, director of the Society for the Protection of Nature,
warns that construction of the development is likely to drive out
more than 30 animal species that live on the point. (5)
(C)
(6) The Compton Point area is zoned as natural parkland. (7) There are
several other areas in the county that are zoned as natural parkland.
(8) However, because this project is potentially so lucrative for the city, the
zoning board seems to be bending to the will of the developers.
(D)
(9) Developers argue that the new jobs
(10) Certainly,
everyone in the
community agrees that the economy around here could use a lift, but this is
not the way to
do it.

(E)
(11) Register your opposition to the development of Compton Point! (12)
Come to a demonstration at 10 a.m. on
(13) Bring signs with
slogans that tell how you feel. (14) A strong turnout at this demonstration
will send a message to developers.
50.
A. Tourism increases both air pollution and litter, which will further
reduce the animals’ chances for survival.
B. Air pollution from tourist traffic will further reduce the animals’
chances for survival, not to mention litter left behind by floods of
tourists.
C. Air pollution from tourist traffic and also litter from tourists
flooding through the area will further reduce the animals’ chances for
survival.
D. Tourism will further reduce animals’ chances for survival because
of air pollution from tourist traffic and floods of litter from tourists.
51. Which revision would improve the effectiveness of paragraph C?
A. remove sentence 6
B. move sentence 6 to follow sentence 7
C. remove sentence 7
D. move sentence 7 to follow sentence 8
52. Developers argue that the new jobs
A. resulting from their development would boost the region’s sagging
economy, and the influx of tourism would too.
B. and influx of tourism resulting from their development would boost
the region’s sagging economy.
C. resulting from their development would help along the economy of
the region. The influx of tourism would too.

D. and also the influx of tourism, that would result from their
development, would cause the region’s economy to boost.
53. Come to a demonstration at 10 a.m. on
A. Saturday, May 7, in front of the mayor’s office 34 wilton road.
B. saturday, May 7, in front of the mayor’s office, 34 Wilton road.
C. Saturday, may 7, in front of the mayor’s office, 34 Wilton road.
D. Saturday, May 7, in front of the mayor’s office, 34 Wilton Road.

End of Reasoning through Language Arts Test

Answers and explanations begin on page 712.

Mathematical Reasoning Practice Test
You may use formulas from this sheet to answer questions on the test.

Directions: Use 20 or fewer minutes to answer the following 5 questions.
You may fill in the circles next to the correct answers or write your answers

in boxes. Refer to the formula sheet on page 593 as needed. YOU MAY NOT
USE YOUR CALCULATOR ON THIS SECTION.
1. Mike borrowed $400 from his brother for six months. He agreed to pay
simple interest at the annual rate of 5 percent. Including interest and
principal, how much will Mike have paid his brother at the end of the six
months?
A. $10
B. $120
C. $410
D. $500
2. What is the value of the expression 3(2x - y) + (3 + x)2 when x = 4 and y =
5?
A. 49
B. 58
C. 61
D. 82
3. Which of the following is equal to the expression below?
(3x + 2y)(5x - 6y)
A. 8x - 4y
B.
C.
D.
4. John needs to replace the boards on a 22-foot section of his fence. He
plans to place the boards as shown below.

Note: Not drawn to scale.

If the boards are

inches wide, how many boards should he buy to

cover the distance?
A. 4
B. 12
C. 48
D. 121
5. What is the value of this expression?

Write your answer in the box below.

Directions: Use a maximum of 1 hour and 35 minutes to answer the
following 41 questions. You may fill in the circles next to the correct answers
or write your answers in boxes. Refer to the formula sheet on page 593 as
needed. YOU MAY USE YOUR CALCULATOR ON THIS SECTION.
6. A storage shelf has room for only two containers on the bottom shelf.
The heaviest boxes should be placed on the bottom. Which two boxes

should be placed on the bottom shelf? Write the letters of the boxes in
the spaces below.

7. Brad’s average golf score after six rounds was 81. For the first five
rounds his scores were 78, 86, 82, 81, and 82. What was his score on
the sixth round?
Write your answer in the box below.

8. A kayaker spends 2 hours paddling up a stream from point A to point
B, quickly turns her kayak around, and immediately heads back
downstream. It takes her only 1 hour to float back down the stream
from point B to point A. If points A and B are 6 miles apart, what was
the kayaker’s average rate of speed in miles per hour?

A. 12 mph
B. 6 mph
C. 4 mph
D. 2 mph
9. In quadrilateral ABCD, side AB is parallel to side CD. Sides AD and
BC are not parallel. What is the area of the figure to the nearest square
centimeter?

Write your answer in the box below.

10. Simplify the following expression:

A.

B. x(x − y)
C.
D.
11. A scientist measures the outside temperature at noon each day over a 3day period.
Day

Temperature at Noon (°F)

Saturday

-1

Sunday

2

Monday

-4

What was the average temperature on these three days? Place an x on
the number line below to represent your answer.

12. What is the value of 47?
Write your answer in the box below.

13.
A

B

C

1

-2

-4

1

2

8

4

3

3

5

2

-1

In the computer spreadsheet above,
is
equal to which of the following? (Hint: On a spreadsheet,* means
multiplication.)
A. -22
B. -12
C. 12
D. 22
14. Simplify the expression:

A.
B.
C.
D.
15. The perimeter of the trapezoid below is 50. What is its area?

A. 12

B. 60
C. 120
D. 150
16. Risa wants to order business cards. A printing company determines the
cost (C) to the customer using the following function, where
number of boxes of cards and
number of ink
colors.

If Risa orders 4 boxes of cards printed in 3 colors, how much will the
cards cost?
A. $214.40
B. $168.00
C. $144.40
D. $102.40
17. The graph of the equation

is a line that

passes through points C and D on the coordinate plane. Which of the
following points also lies on the graph of the equation?

A. (3, 1)
B.
C. (5, 3)
D. (10, 6)
18. Which of the following equations correctly describes the line on the
graph?

A.

B.

C.

D.
19. What is the 6th term in the sequence below?

1, 3, 7, 15, 31, __, 127
A. 62
B. 63
C. 68
D. 77
20. Evening tickets to a play are $24.50 each. Tickets for the afternoon
show are $19 each. Janice wants to buy 6 tickets. Arrange terms from
the options below to construct the expression Janice would use to
determine how much less she would spend if she chooses an afternoon
show instead of an evening show. (You do not need to use all of the
terms offered as options. Use any term only once.)

21. In a certain state, the legislature has 100 seats. In 2010, Party X held 54
seats. In the 2012 election, the party gained two seats. If, in the 2014
election, Party X loses 6 seats, but gains 2 seats in the 2016 election,
what will the absolute change in the number of seats held by Party X
from 2010 to 2016 be?
Write your answer in the box below.

22. What is the surface area of the cylinder below?

A.
B.
C.
D.

23.

A.
B.
C.
D.

24. Customers of Paul’s Beauty Supply can make purchases online, from a
catalog, or in the store.

About how much more did the company make from catalog sales than
from online sales in March?
A. $35,000
B. $65,000
C. $130,000
D. $195,000
25. Which of the following is a graph of the inequality

26. At what point does the line with the equation

?

intersect with the line with the equation

?

A.
B.
C. (0, 3)
D. (2, 7)
27. A pole is supported by a cable as shown. The cable is attached to the
ground 9 feet from the base of the pole, and it is attached to the pole 12
feet above the ground.

Which of the following expressions could be used to find the length of
the cable?

A.
B.
C.
D.
28. Meg is an interior designer who is looking to place two chairs against
an accent wall. She has four different chairs from which to choose,
each a different color: yellow, red, green, and blue. How many
different combinations of chairs can Meg use in her design?
Write your answer in the box below.

29. The Whitmans are trying to pay off their credit card debt, so they
developed the following budget based on their monthly take-home pay.

If the Whitmans’ monthly take-home pay is $2500, about how much do
they plan to pay each month on their credit card debt?
A. $600
B. $450
C. $300
D. $240
30. A market sells all varieties of pasta at a rate of 4 boxes for $5.00.
Jennifer needs 3 boxes of ziti and 3 boxes of spaghetti. At this rate,
how much will she spend for the pasta?
Write your answer in the box below.

31. Inge has been receiving a variety of advertisements in the mail. In
order to figure out if the number of advertisements was increasing over
time, she kept track of how many advertisements she received each
week over an eight-week period. This is her record:

The dot plot below is based on the table Inge created, above. However,
it is incomplete. Place additional dots on the dot plot until it accurately
reflects Inge’s records over the eight week period.

32. If the area of circle O is 36π, what is its diameter?
A. 6
B. 6π
C. 12
D. 18
33. In 2011, Karen’s base salary was $52,500, and she earned an end-ofyear bonus of $6,250. In 2012, her base salary was raised to $56,300
and her end-of-year bonus was $4,100. What was the percent increase
or decrease in her overall earnings from 2011 to 2012?
Write your answer in the box below. Round your answer to the nearest
tenth of a percent.

34. Imtaez works as a server in a restaurant. On a certain night, the servers
at his restaurant can earn a 50 cent bonus each time the dinner special
is ordered. In order to qualify for the bonus, a server must submit at
least 10 dinner special orders. Complete a linear equation that models
the total bonus a server can expect to earn based on the number of
dinner specials ordered, where b is the total bonus in dollars and d is
the number of dinner specials ordered.
Arrange terms from the options below to complete the equation you
would use to determine how much Imtaez will receive as a bonus if he
sells at least 10 dinner specials. (You may not need to use all of the
terms offered as options. Use any term only once.)

35. Place a dot on the coordinate plane below to represent the solution to
the following system of equations:

36. A bag contains 12 red, 3 blue, 6 green, and 4 yellow marbles. If a
marble is drawn from the bag at random, what is the probability that
the marble will be either blue or yellow?
A. 7%
B. 12%
C. 25%
D. 28%
37. The right cone shown below has a base with a radius of 6.4 cm.

To the nearest cubic centimeter, what is the volume of the cone? (Use
3.14 for π.)
A. 40
B. 81
C. 129
D. 514
38. Ten artists have entered an art show. There are three prizes to be
awarded in the art show: first prize, second prize, and third prize. How
many possible ways could those prizes be awarded among the ten
artists?
Write your answer in the box below.

39. Archie has made a huge pot of chili. He cannot eat it all himself, so he
is going to share some with his neighbors and family. Archie will give
of the chili to his parents. He will give of it to his neighbor
Cecilia. He will give another

of it to his neighbor Chang. How much

of the chili will Archie have left over? Place a dot on the number line
below to reflect the correct answer.

40. At the end of baseball season, 5 percent of the children enrolled in a
local youth baseball program will be chosen to play in the state
tournament. If 12 children will be chosen to play in the tournament,
how many children are enrolled in the program?
A. 60
B. 120
C. 240
D. 600
41. Fabio has his own computer repair business. He uses the following
guidelines to estimate how long a project will take.
Install operating system: 1 hour
Replace motherboard:

hours

Reimage hard drive: 2 hours
Upgrade memory: 20 minutes
Install new hard drive: 45 minutes
Install sound card: 30 minutes
Install video card: 30 minutes
Fabio needs to install a new hard drive and an operating system for a
customer. If Fabio charges $65 per hour, what will he charge
the customer for his time?

A. $94.25
B. $105.00
C. $113.75
D. $146.25
42. There are approximately 1,335,000,000 cubic kilometers of water in
Earth’s oceans. Which of the following expresses that number in
scientific notation?
A.
B.

C.

D.
43. What is the slope of the line shown below?

Write your answer in the box below.

44. One number is 12 more than 3 times another number. The sum of the
two numbers is −20. What are the numbers?
A. 8 and 12
B. 8 and −12
C. −2 and −18
D. −8 and −12
45. Which of the following pairs of numbers is a solution to the equation
?

A. −6 and 3
B. −2 and 9
C. −3 and 6
D. −9 and 2
46. Match the solutions to the equations.
Equation

Value of the Variable

50
−8
−7
11

End of Mathematical Reasoning Test

Answers and explanations begin on page 716.

Social Studies Practice Test
Directions: Use 65 minutes to answer the following 34 questions. You may
fill in the circles next to the correct answers or write your answers in boxes or
on lines as indicated.
Question 1 is based on the following paragraph and graph.
When the value of exported goods—those sold abroad—is greater than the
value of imported goods—those bought from foreign nations—there is a
favorable balance of trade. On the other hand, when imports are greater than
exports, there is an unfavorable balance of trade.

1. Which of the following statements is supported by the paragraph and the
graph?
A. Exports equaled imports at the start of the 2000s.

B. Exports exceeded imports throughout the 2000s.
C. The United States had a favorable balance of trade in merchandise
during the 2000s.
D. The United States had an unfavorable balance of trade in
merchandise during the 2000s.
Question 2 is based on the following table. You MAY use your calculator.
2. In an opinion poll, people were asked, “In politics, as of today, do you
consider yourself a Republican, a Democrat, or an independent?” The
chart below represents the results, by month, for the first six months of
2013.
Republicans%

Independents% Democrats%

Jan 2013

27

38

33

Feb 2013

28

38

32

Mar 2013

27

36

35

Apr 2013

26

40

33

May 2013

28

39

32

Jun 2013

26

41

31

Source: Gallup

During the first six months of 2013, what percent of the people surveyed,
on average, considered themselves independents? (Assume that the same
number of people were surveyed each month.) Round your answer to the
nearest percentage and write your answer in the box below.

Questions 3 and 4 are based on the following information and graph.
What standard of living do people in other countries enjoy? There are

different ways to answer that question. Many economists hold that one good
way is to calculate gross domestic product (GDP) per capita. GDP per capita
is found by adding up the value of all the goods produced and services
performed in a given country in a year and then dividing that total (the GDP)
by the number of people living in that country.
The map below shows GDP per capita for each country in the world in 2008.
Some, but not all, of the countries are labeled with the name of the country.

3. In the map above, place a dot on the continent that, in 2008, had the
highest percentage of countries with a GDP per capita of less than
$10,000 per year.
4. Place the countries below in order from highest GDP per capita to lowest
GDP per capita.
Highest
Second highest
Third highest
Lowest
Democratic Republic of Congo

United States
Mexico
India
Question 5 refers to the following information and chart.
The Consumer Price Index (CPI) is a measure of the average prices paid
by consumers for a typical assortment of goods and services, including
housing, food, clothing, transportation, recreation, and medical care. A
higher CPI indicates that prices have risen. The table below shows the
CPI for several years, as well as the percent change in CPI over the
previous year.
Year

CPI

Percent Change in
CPI over Previous
Year

2008

215.3

3.8

2009

214.5

-0.4

2010

218.1

1.6

2011

224.9

3.2

2012

229.6

2.1

Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics

5. For the years included in the table, what was the median percent
change in CPI over the previous year?
Write your answer in the box below.

6. The 15th Amendment to the Constitution, ratified in 1870, declared
that U.S. citizens’ right to vote “shall not be denied . . . on account of
race.” However, some states found ways to continue to restrict voting

rights for almost a century. For example, Mississippi’s
1890 constitution restricted African Americans’ voting rights by
imposing a poll tax and a literacy test. In the Voting Rights Act of
1965, Congress outlawed such restrictions and put protections in
place for minority voters.

On the timeline above, place two dots above the years in which voting
rights were expanded in the United States.
7. Like the ancient Chinese, the ancient Greeks thought that a sound
political system and well-established social relationships were
necessary for a stable society. Greek rule was decentralized, and as a
result, many political structures coexisted. In contrast, Chinese rule
was largely centralized, and a single political system prevailed. The
Greeks placed more value on councils, participation, and law; the
Chinese, on bureaucracy, hierarchy, and rules.
Based on the paragraph, what did the ancient Greeks and the ancient
Chinese have in common in regard to politics and government?
A. Both governed through a hierarchical bureaucracy.
B. Both valued a stable political framework for society.
C. Both had centralized councils.
D. Both had decentralized political systems.
Question 8 refers to the following chart.
The Effect of World War II on Industry
Measure

1939

1940

1941

Index of manufacturing
output (1939 = 100)

100

116

154

$9.3

$17

Corporate profits before $6.4 billion

taxes

billion billion

Corporate profits after
taxes

$5 billion

$6.5
$9.4
billion billion

8. Which of the following best explains why the war had the effect on
industry indicated by the chart?
A. Even before the United States entered the war, corporate profits had
increased sharply.
B. Manufacturing output increased by over 50 percent in two years.
C. The war created a huge demand for military equipment and supplies.
D. With men gone to serve as soldiers, more women were employed in
factories.
9. The U.S. president has a great deal of influence over foreign policy. In
part, this is because international relations often require quick and
decisive action, which is best undertaken by an individual. In times of
foreign crisis, the public usually rallies to the support of the president, at
least at first.
Which of the following values probably underlies Americans’ initial
approval of a president’s emergency foreign policy actions?
A. patriotism
B. imperialism
C. self-expression
D. self-sacrifice
10. To combat the anticompetitive nature of monopolies or “trusts” such as
US Steel, Standard Oil, and the American Tobacco Company, the U.S.
Congress passed the Sherman Antitrust Act in 1890. That act made it
illegal for an individual to monopolize or conspire to monopolize an
industry or to act with others to restrain trade or commerce among the
States or abroad. While the Sherman Antitrust Act was, and remains, very
influential, it was not sufficient to solve all of the problems raised by

monopolies. Because of its broad language and its focus on the intent to
create monopolies, courts interpreted the Sherman Antitrust Act
differently and inconsistently in the many cases to which it was applied.
As a result, Congress passed the Clayton Antitrust Act in 1914, which
targeted specific actions—such as favorable price discrimination and
exclusive dealings contracts—that were used to create monopolies.
In the passage above, the writer’s main point is that
A. courts struck down the Sherman Antitrust Act because its broad
language made it unconstitutional
B. problems with consistently enforcing the Sherman Antitrust Act led
to further legislation to prevent monopolies
C. monopolies like US Steel, Standard Oil, and the American Tobacco
Company successfully avoided prosecution under the Sherman
Antitrust Act
D. the Sherman Antitrust Act ended monopolies like US Steel,
Standard Oil, and the American Tobacco Company, but did not
prevent new monopolies from arising
11. Since the mid-twentieth century, environmental scientists have been
warning the United States about the impact of unchecked carbon
emissions into the atmosphere, a threat that many researchers conclude
has already led to climate change. Of the many long-term dangers of
climate change, which refers to the trend toward greater
global temperature extremes, some of the most destructive involve
lengthy droughts, diminishing fresh water supplies, and decreased world
food production. Although some point to the potential benefits of the
temperature changes in particular hemispheres, benefits such as longer
growing seasons and more temperate climates for certain populations, the
hazards far outweigh any potential advantages. Since the United States
has the second highest rate of carbon emissions per person, it must lead
the way by dramatically cutting industrial emissions and finding alternate
sources of fuel that do not release carbon dioxide as a byproduct. Positive
efforts are underway, particularly through the Environmental Protection
Agency, which has fostered several international partnerships to limit the
production of carbon dioxide, among other greenhouse gases.

Place the letter of each statement within the correct column. You may or
may not fill up each column.
The author would agree
with this statement:

The author would
disagree with this
statement:

The author does not
address this
information:

A. The United States has failed to take any action against carbon
emissions.
B. The dangers of climate change are more significant than the possible
benefits.
C. Wind energy is preferable to solar energy.
D. Climate change will not impact the world food supply.
Questions 12 and 13 refer to the following map.

12. Which of the following is the most likely reason that American Indians
were forcibly relocated in the 1830s?
A. Whites wanted lands in the Kansas and Nebraska territory for
settlement.
B. Whites wanted to take over Indian lands in the eastern states.
C. Indians of different tribes wanted to settle in a single Indian
territory.
D. Indians in the eastern states wanted to look for gold in the West.

13. Which American Indian tribe was moved the farthest from its tribal
lands?
A. the Sauk/Fox
B. the Cherokee
C. the Chocktaw
D. the Seminole
Question 14 refers to the following cartoon.

14. With which of the following opinions would the cartoonist be most likely
to agree?
A. People shouldn’t have to stand around waiting to see their elected
representatives.
B. Senators should pay attention to special interest groups as well as to
voters.

C. Special interest groups are treated better than voters by members of
Congress.
D. Senators are nicer to their constituents than are members of the
House.
15. In the late 1800s, industrialization caused a large-scale migration from
rural to urban areas in the United States. Parents who moved to cities with
their children left behind the social support of their extended families. In
addition, city families found that children, who were an asset on the farm
because they could work at an early age, were more of an economic
drawback in the city. As a consequence, the birthrate dropped during this
period and average family size shrank.
Which of the following is the best summary of this passage?
A. Industrialization led to increased urbanization in the late 1800s.
B. City families lost the social support of their extended families back
on the farm.
C. Industrialization and urbanization caused many changes in family
life in the late 1800s.
D. In the late 1800s, average family size shrank due to the fall in the
birthrate.
Questions 16 and 17 refer to the following chart.
Acts of Parliament Directed at the American Colonies
Act

Description

Revenue Act of 1764 (Sugar Act)

Imposed duties (tariffs) on
foreign sugar and luxuries to
raise money for Great Britain

Quartering Act of 1765

Required colonists to provide
food and shelter for British
soldiers

Stamp Act of 1765

Required colonists to purchase

revenue stamps for all
important documents,
including legal documents,
newspapers, and ads
Declaratory Act of 1766

Asserted the right of
Parliament to make laws for
the colonies

Townshend Acts of 1767

Imposed new duties on the
import of tea, glass, and paper

16. How did the Declaratory Act differ from all the other acts of Parliament
shown in the chart?
A. It did not involve the quartering of British soldiers.
B. It related only to the import of luxury goods.
C. It did not impose direct economic costs on the colonists.
D. It was enacted long after the other acts of Parliament.
17. The information in this chart would have been most useful for the writing
of which of the following documents?
A. the Declaration of Independence, which explained why the colonies
broke away from Great Britain
B. the Articles of Confederation, which established a central
government consisting of a congress
C. the U.S. Constitution, which established the structure of government
for the newly independent nation
D. Washington’s Farewell Address, in which he warned the new nation
of policies and practices he thought unwise
Questions 18 and 19 are based on the following map.

Source: The United Nations, World Food Program

18. According to the map, what is the percentage range of people in the
United States who do not get enough food and nutrients?
A. 0% to 4%
B. 4% to 20%
C. 20% to 35%
D. 35% to 73%
19. Which of the following statements is supported by the information on the
map?
A. All areas with more than 35% of the population undernourished are
inland nations.
B. World hunger would disappear if food were distributed more fairly.
C. There are no areas of hunger in Europe or Australia.
D. Hunger is a major problem in many countries in Africa.
Questions 20 through 22 refer to the following chart.

Important Political Documents Preceding the Declaration of
Independence and the U.S. Constitution
Year

Document

Description

1215

Magna Carta

Limited the power of
the English king and
granted rights to the
nobles

1620

Mayflower Compact Set rules by which
the Pilgrims would
govern themselves in
Plymouth colony

1628

Petition of Right

Limited the English
king’s powers further

1636

Great Fundamentals

Established the first
basic system of laws
in the English
colonies, in
Massachusetts Bay
Colony

1688

English Bill of
Rights

Declared that the
king rules with the
consent of the
people’s
representatives in
Parliament; granted
ordinary people
certain rights

20. What do the Mayflower Compact and the Great Fundamentals have in
common?
A. Both limited the power of the king.
B. Both granted rights to the nobles.

C. Both established methods of selfgovernment in English colonies.
D. Both applied to the government in England.
21. One of the major grievances the American colonists had against the
British was that the British taxed the colonists without granting them
representation in the British Parliament. Part of the Declaration of
Independence is a list of political and economic rights that American
colonists complained that the British king had deprived them of.
By which of the following documents were the writers of the Declaration
probably most influenced as they drafted their list?
A. the Mayflower Compact
B. the Petition of Right
C. the Great Fundamentals
D. the English Bill of Rights
22. Which document first set limits on the British monarch’s powers?
A. the Magna Carta
B. the Mayflower Compact
C. the Petition of Right
D. the English Bill of Rights
23. The civil rights movement of the 1950s and 1960s inspired historians to
reinterpret slavery’s impact on U.S. society in general and on African
Americans in particular. One interpretation that emerged was that slaves
and owners were always in conflict and that slavery was destructive. The
extent of slavery’s destructiveness was debated. Some historians argued
that slavery destroyed the culture and self-respect of the slaves and their
descendants. Others thought that slaves overcame hardship by developing
a unique African American culture that included, among many different
things, strong religious and musical traditions.
Based on the paragraph, which of the following statements is an opinion

rather than a fact?
A. The civil rights movement took place during the middle of the
twentieth century.
B. The civil rights movement caused historians to take another look at
slavery.
C. Historians debated slavery’s negative effects on slaves and their
descendants.
D. Slavery destroyed the culture of the slaves, diminishing their selfrespect.
Questions 24 and 25 refer to the following paragraph and graph.
The market price of a product tends to change in a way that brings supply and
demand into balance, a condition called equilibrium. This is illustrated in the
graph below, which shows supply and demand for apples.

24. According to this graph, what is the market price of apples—also known
as the price at equilibrium?
A. 45 cents
B. 30 cents
C. 20 cents
D. 15 cents
25. Which of the following would result if part of the apple crop were
destroyed but demand remained the same?
A. Supply would increase.

B. The market price would remain the same.
C. The market price would go down.
D. The market price would go up.
Question 26 refers to the following paragraph and map.
The Battle of Fort Sumter was the first battle of the American Civil War.
South Carolina had seceded from the Union and insisted that Union troops in
South Carolina leave. A small band of Union soldiers was finally forced to
evacuate Fort Sumter, on the South Carolina coast. After that, President
Lincoln called for 75,000 volunteers to help put down the rebellion in the
south. Following his call, four additional states seceded from the Union and
joined the Confederacy. The progress of secession is shown here.

Reprinted from “The South Secedes,” U.S. History Online Textbook, ushistory.org.

26. Match each of the following states to the appropriate column(s) in the
table. A state may be matched to both columns, or to none at all. You
may or may not fill up each column.

Questions 27 through 29 refer to the following paragraph and diagram.
Most cases that arise under federal law are tried in the federal court system.
The federal court system has several levels of courts and several routes by
which cases may be appealed to a higher court.

27. A U.S. import-export firm files a lawsuit against a foreign trading
company. In which court is the suit most likely to be filed?
A. the United States Claims Court

B. the United States Court of Appeals
C. the Court of International Trade
D. the United States Tax Court
28. The U.S. Constitution established only the Supreme Court, but it gave
Congress the power to create inferior (lower) federal courts.
Which of the following is the most likely reason that Congress
established other federal courts?
A. The justices of the U.S. Supreme Court were not well versed enough
in the law to handle all federal cases.
B. The volume and variety of federal cases were too great for a single
court to
handle.
C. A system of inferior federal courts gave the United States prestige in
the eyes of the rest of the world.
D. The Supreme Court’s power to interpret the Constitution was
established in Marbury v. Madison.
29. If cases are not resolved in any of the lower federal courts, to which court
may they eventually, finally be appealed?
A. the Supreme Court of the United States
B. the United States Courts of Appeals
C. the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit
D. the Court of Military Appeals
Question 30 refers to the following poster.
The poster below was published during World War I.

Source: Library of Congress. Poster by James Montgomery Flagg

30. Which of the following opinions is the artist attempting to propagate?
A. Americans are not yet part of civilization.

B. The war effort needs the help of
everyone, including men, women, and children.
C. Every man, woman, and child should rest in preparation for the war
effort.
D. Americans are part of a lazy civilization.
Questions 31 and 32 refer to the following paragraph and maps.
Mapmakers have devised many solutions to the problem of projecting the
curved surface of Earth onto a flat piece of paper. However, all map
projections involve some distortion, and each type of projection has
advantages and disadvantages. Two types of projections are shown here.

31. Approximately where is there the least distortion on these projections?
A. at 60° north and south latitude

B. at 40° north and south latitude
C. at 20° north and south latitude
D. at 0° latitude
32. A sailor who wanted to plan an around-the-world sailing trip decided to
use the interrupted projection. What was wrong with his decision?
A. The interrupted projection distorts distances across the continents at
midlatitudes.
B. The interrupted projection distorts distances across the oceans.
C. The interrupted projection distorts the shapes of midlatitude land
masses.
D. The interrupted projection shows only a few of the world’s oceans.
Question 33 refers to the following paragraph and map.
After the Roman Empire had reached its greatest extent in the 2nd century
C.E. emperors consolidated its borders in various ways: where the frontiers
were over land, they were seen as vulnerable, and so the emperors often built
heavy fortifications, such as forts or walls to defend the borders; where there
was a natural barrier like a river or a desert, light fortifications, such as
watchtowers, were viewed as adequate; and where there were major barriers,
such as the ocean, the emperors concluded that no defense was needed.

33. Based on the information in the paragraph above, match the appropriate
degree of fortification to each part of the frontier on the map. You may
use some labels twice.
Heavy
Light
None
34. Constitutional guarantees of fairness and equality under the law, our basic
civil liberties, are called due process of law. The Fifth and Fourteenth
Amendments state that government shall not deprive anyone of
“life, liberty, or property, without due process of law.” The Fifth
Amendment protects people from actions of the federal government. The
Fourteenth protects people specifically from actions of governments of

the individual states.
What is a main difference between the Fifth and Fourteenth
Amendments?
A. The Fifth Amendment applies to adults, and the Fourteenth
Amendment, to
children.
B. The Fifth Amendment applies to due process, and the Fourteenth Amendment, to freedom of speech.
C. The Fifth Amendment applies to the federal government, and the
Fourteenth Amendment, to state governments.
D. The Fifth Amendment applies to life, and the Fourteenth
Amendment, to liberty.

End of the Social Studies Test

Answers and explanations begin on page 720.

Science Practice Test
Directions: Use 90 minutes to answer the following 36 questions. You may
fill in the circles next to the correct answers or write your answers in boxes or
on lines as indicated.
Question 1 refers to the following paragraph and diagram.
Newton’s third law of motion states that when one object exerts a force upon
another object, the second object exerts an equal force on the first, in the
opposite direction. An airplane in motion changes the speed and direction of
the air, exerting a force on it. The opposing force of the air keeps the airplane
aloft.

1. What vertical force holds the airplane up?
A. lift
B. Newton's third law
C. weight
D. air resistance
2. Sleep may have evolved in humans for several reasons. First, people were
unable to hunt, gather food, or travel in the dark. Second, sleep provides
an opportunity to repair our body’s cells, especially those in the brain.
Third, our body temperature is lower during sleep, which conserves
energy. Fourth, during deep sleep the pituitary gland releases a growth
hormone, so sleep may play a role in growth.
Which of the following is the best title for this paragraph?
A. “Sleep and Growth”
B. “Our Brains During Sleep”
C. “Why We Sleep”
D. “The Role of Deep Sleep”
3. You MAY use your calculator on this question.
A scientist shines a laser through six beakers, each containing a different
liquid substance, and measures the laser beam’s angle of refraction. The
scientist records her measurements for liquids A–E in the table below; her

measurement for liquid F is lost.
Liquid

Angle of Refraction
(degrees)

A

15

B

32

C

12

D

47

E

15

F

?

However, the scientist recalls that the mean of all six angle measurements
was 23 degrees. What must the laser beam’s angle of refraction through
liquid F have been?
Write your answer in the box below.

Questions 4 through 6 are based on the following information and graphic.
The processes that circulate nitrogen between the atmosphere, land, and
organisms are called the nitrogen cycle.

4. Nitrogen-fixing bacteria are found both in the soil and on the roots of
legumes like peas and beans. From where do these bacteria get nitrogen?
A. ammonia and ammonium
B. the air and rainwater in the soil
C. animals and animal wastes
D. animal wastes and decaying plants
5. Which of the following statements is a conclusion about the nitrogen
cycle rather than a detail in the diagram?
A. Nitrogen oxides dissolve in rainwater.
B. Nitrogen-fixing bacteria are found both in the soil and on the roots
of legumes.
C. The recycling of nitrogen through the biosphere involves many
complex processes.
D. Nitrite bacteria turn ammonia and ammonium into nitrites.
6. To increase the nitrogen content of the soil, many farmers spread
synthetic fertilizers containing nitrogen compounds. What might an
organic farmer, who does not use synthetic fertilizers, do to improve the

fertility of the soil?
A. switch to crops requiring more potassium
B. compost with plant and animal wastes
C. plant more nonleguminous plants
D. switch to crops requiring more nitrogen
Question 7 refers to the following graph.

7. Which of the following statements is supported by the information in the

graph?
A. About 15 grams of sodium bicarbonate will dissolve in 100 mL of
water at 10°.
B. About 30 grams of potassium chloride will dissolve in 100 mL of
water at 30°.
C. Sodium chloride shows the greatest increase in solubility with
increase in temperature.
D. For the three compounds shown, solubility increases as temperature
increases.
8. Directions: Following the scientific method, a researcher conducted an
experiment using houseplants. Match each action the scientist took to the
step in the scientific method below.
Step of the Scientific Method

The Scientist’s Action

Step 1. Formulate a question about a
phenomenon
Step 2. Collect data
Step 3. Form a hypothesis
Step 4. Test the hypothesis through an
experiment
Step 5. Draw a conclusion
A. For 6 weeks, the scientist used water at 75 degrees to water plants in
Group A and used water at 55 degrees to water plants in Group B. He
recorded their growth during this period.
B. The scientist wondered whether water at different temperatures
might affect houseplants differently.
C. The scientist researched the growth rate of plants at various
greenhouses, some of which use cool water and some of which use
warm water to water their plants.

D. At the end of 6 weeks, the plants in Group A were, on average, 2"
taller than plants in Group B. The scientist interpreted this to mean that
warm water is better for plants than cool water.
E. The scientist guessed that warm water might be better for plants than
cool water.
9. Atoms are composed of protons (positive charge), neutrons (no
charge), and electrons (negative charge). Because an atom has an
equal number of protons and electrons, it has a total charge of zero.
What would happen if an atom lost an electron?
A. Its charge would become positive.
B. Its charge would become negative.
C. Its charge would remain neutral.
D. Its neutrons would gain a positive charge.
10. Weathering is the breaking down of rock by rain, frost, wind, and
other elements. No transport is involved in weathering. The weathered
rock remains in place. Weathering can be physical, involving abrasion
—the wearing away of a surface—or changes in temperature; it can
be chemical, involving chemical reactions; or it can be organic,
involving the action of living things.
Which of the following is an example of physical weathering?
A. the cracking of granite from the expansion of freezing water
B. the breakdown of calcite by reaction with acids in fertilizer
C. the transport of sand by the wind
D. the breakdown of crumbling rock in the soil by burrowing
worms
11. When removed from the body, large organs live only a few hours or
days under cold conditions. Therefore, organ transplants must be
performed quickly. Many organs go to waste because the organ

cannot be transported to an appropriate patient in the short time
available. Unfortunately, it is not yet possible to freeze large organs to
preserve them for a longer period. That’s because they contain many
different types of cells, all of which react differently to freezing.
Some cells are even destroyed by the ice crystals that form during
freezing.
Which of the following studies is most likely to yield information that
might help solve the specific problem of freezing whole organs for
transplant?
A. how the time it takes to locate patients who need organs can be
decreased
B. how the time it takes to transport organs to their destinations can
be decreased
C. how special fluids keep insects alive during subfreezing weather
D. how radioactive isotopes can be used to diagnose the condition
of donated organs
12. Most animals have bodies that exhibit either bilateral symmetry or
radial symmetry. If you drew a straight line down the middle of an
animal exhibiting bilateral symmetry, the two sides would be mirror
images of one another. Such animals have a front end and a rear end.
On the other hand, an animal exhibiting radial symmetry has a body
consisting of similar parts arranged around a center.
Circle the image of the animal(s) below displaying a radially
symmetrical body plan.
A. salt marsh greenhead fly

B. sea star

C. dogfish

D. horseshoe crab

13. Hydrogen peroxide molecules are composed of two hydrogen atoms
and two oxygen atoms. Water is also composed of hydrogen and
oxygen, but water has one fewer oxygen atom than hydrogen peroxide
does. Which of the following statements best describes the chemical
reaction shown in the equation below?

A. Hydrogen peroxide is being made out of water and air.
B. Hydrogen peroxide is decomposing into pure water.
C. Hydrogen peroxide is decomposing into water and oxygen.
D. Water and oxygen are combining to make hydrogen peroxide.
Question 14 refers to the following chart.
Melting and Boiling Points
Element

Melting Point, F

Boiling Point, F

Mercury

–38

675

Bromine

19

138

Iron

2,795

5,184

Carbon

6,420

8,720

Gold

1,945

5,379

14. Which of the following statements is supported by the information in
the chart?
A. Mercury and bromine are liquids at room temperature.
B. Iron has a higher melting point than carbon.
C. Iron has a higher boiling point than gold.
D. Mercury, bromine, iron, carbon, and gold are all metals.
15. In 1969, the U.S. Surgeon General announced that infectious bacterial
diseases would soon become a thing of the past because antibiotic
drugs had become so effective against them. However, since that
time, strains of disease-causing bacteria that are resistant to antibiotics
have evolved. Some types of pneumonia and gastrointestinal
infections are now untreatable by antibiotics. About 17 million people
worldwide still die annually from infectious diseases.

Which of the following best explains why the U.S. Surgeon General’s
prediction was wrong?
A. Antibiotic drugs are not effective against most disease-causing
bacteria.
B. Infectious diseases are also caused by viruses and parasites.
C. Infectious diseases have remained a problem outside the United
States.
D. Bacteria quickly evolved resistance to antibiotic drugs.
16. A student did an experiment to see how far a ball would roll on
different surfaces. She made five different ramps, each with a different surface: a plain pine board, a painted board, a board covered
with sandpaper, a board covered with artificial turf, and a board
covered with shag carpet. She set up his experiment on a smooth,
level floor. To make the ramps, she raised one end of each board with
a book. She collected four copies of the science textbook her class
was using and set up four of the ramps with these books. She couldn’t
find a fifth copy of the book, so she used a thinner science study guide
to set up the fifth ramp. She rolled a tennis ball down each ramp and
measured how far the ball traveled each time. Then she compiled his
data and drew conclusions.
Why was the student’s experiment flawed?
A. The student should have used a ball with a smooth surface rather
than a tennis ball.
B. The student should have used books of the same height for all of
the ramps.
C. The student should not have used sandpaper as one of the
surfaces.
D. For a control, the student should have rolled the ball across a
piece of wood that was level.
17. A solid rubber ball and a hollow rubber ball of the same size and
material are dropped simultaneously, in a complete vacuum, from a

height of 100 meters above sea level. Which ball will have a greater
speed after falling 2 meters?
A. The solid ball will have the greater speed.
B. The hollow ball will have the greater speed.
C. Both balls will have the same speed.
D. There is not sufficient information to determine which ball will
have the greater speed.
18. A patient’s blood pressure is 130/100. The first number is systolic
blood pressure, and the second one is diastolic blood pressure. Based
on the diagram shown, would the patient’s blood pressure level be
considered low, normal, elevated, or high?

A. Low
B. Normal
C. Elevated

D. High
19. The titration curve below shows the change in pH of a solution as a
reagent is added. How many milliliters of reagent are needed to
neutralize the solution? (To neutralize a solution means to bring it to a
pH of 7.)

A. 10
B. 25
C. 30
D. 50
Question 20 refers to the following paragraph and diagram.
Herbivores are animals that eat only plants; carnivores are animals that
eat animals. Typical herbivore and carnivore teeth patterns are
shown below.

20. What is the most notable difference between the dog’s teeth and the
sheep’s teeth?
A. The dog has fewer teeth than the
sheep does.
B. The dog has molars and the sheep does not.
C. The dog has incisors and the sheep does not.
D. The dog has canines and the sheep does not.
Question 21 refers to the following chart.
The Five Largest Asteroids
Name

Average distance
from sun (Earth =

Time to orbit sun

1)
Ceres

2.77

4.6 years

Pallas

2.77

4.6 years

Vesta

2.36

3.6 years

Hygeia

3.13

5.5 years

Interamnia

3.06

5.4 years

21. Which of the following statements is supported by the information in
the chart?
A. Pallas is further away from the sun than Hygeia is.
B. Of the five largest asteroids, Vesta has the longest orbital period.
C. The five largest asteroids are all farther from the sun than Earth
is.
D. Of the five largest asteroids, only Interamnia takes more than
five years to orbit the sun.
22. The American lobster, Homerus americanus, is typically bluish-green
to brown in coloration. However, a rare genetic mutation, estimated to
occur in 1 in 2 million lobsters, can result in a bright blue-colored
shell. In 2011, 220 million pounds of lobsters, typically weighing 1–9
pounds each, were caught; two blue lobsters were reported in that
time.
In 2011, the experimental probability of catching a blue lobster was
the estimated probability of a lobster having the blue
mutation.
greater than
approximately the same as
less than
Question 23 is based on the following diagram.

23. Based on the diagram, what causes a volcano to erupt?
A. Pressure builds up inside the magma chamber and vent.
B. Magma flows down toward the underground chamber.
C. The lava plug at the top of the main vent wears away.
D. The lava plug at the top of the main vent collapses inward.
24. In a chemical reaction, the atoms of the reactants are rearranged to
form products with different chemical and physical properties. A
catalyst is a substance that speeds the rate at which a chemical
reaction takes place. The catalyst itself is unchanged at the end of the
reaction. In which of the following reactions is a catalyst at work?
A. when an acid is neutralized, as when hydrochloric acid is added
to sodium hydroxide yielding sodium chloride and water

B. when food is digested, as when an
enzyme in saliva called ptyalin breaks down starch into sugars
without itself changing
C. when copper is oxidized by combining with nitric acid to yield
copper nitrate, nitrogen dioxide, and water
D. when baking soda is heated, causing the sodium bicarbonate to
break down, yielding carbon dioxide gas as a byproduct
25. For five years, researchers at the University of Wisconsin Medical
School ran an experiment in which they evaluated the hearing of
3,753 people between the ages of 48 and 92. Of the group, 46 percent
were nonsmokers, 30.3 percent were former smokers, and 14.7
percent still smoked. The scientists found that smokers were nearly
1.7 times as likely as nonsmokers to suffer hearing loss. The study
suggests that age-related hearing loss might be preventable.
Which of the following statements is most likely to have been the
researchers’ hypothesis?
A. Smoking has been shown to harm health in many different ways.
B. People can reduce their chances of
developing age-related hearing loss by not smoking.
C. The University of Wisconsin study group consisted of 3,753
people between the ages of 48 and 92.
D. Smokers were nearly 1.7 times as likely as nonsmokers to suffer
hearing loss.
Question 26 refers to the following graphs.

26. What is one of the main differences between the composition of
humans and that of bacteria?
A. Humans contain elements other than oxygen, carbon, nitrogen,
and hydrogen and bacteria do not.
B. Humans contain a higher percentage of oxygen than bacteria do.
C. Humans contain a higher percentage of hydrogen than bacteria
do.
D. Humans contain a higher percentage of carbon than bacteria do.

Question 27 refers to the following diagrams.

27. What do the wheel and axle and the screw have in common?
A. Both increase the effort needed to move a load.
B. Both involve effort applied with circular motion.
C. Both involve effort applied with horizontal motion.
D. Both involve effort applied with vertical motion.
28. During various periods in Earth’s history, average global temperatures
have dropped, resulting in ice ages. During an ice age, glaciers cover
large regions of Earth. Scientists disagree about what causes ice ages.
One hypothesis suggests that there have been long term changes in
Earth’s orbit, causing the planet to periodically move farther from the
sun. Another view proposes that a periodic increase in volcanic
activity increases the dust in the atmosphere, blocking the sun’s rays.
Still another hypothesis suggests that changes in Earth’s own radiant
energy cause ice ages. And finally, other scientists propose that
changes in the direction of ocean currents cause ice ages.
Which of the following statements is a fact and NOT an opinion or
hypothesis?
A. During an ice age, temperatures drop and ice covers vast areas
of Earth.
B. Changes in Earth’s orbit cause temperature fluctuations and ice
ages.

C. Large amounts of volcanic dust blocking the sun’s energy cause
ice ages.
D. Changes in Earth’s own radiant energy cause ice ages.
Question 29 refers to the following diagram.

29. What is the main difference between the hydrocarbons ether and
ethanol?
A. Ether has carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen atoms, and ethanol has
only carbon and hydrogen atoms.
B. Ether has three carbon atoms and ethanol has two carbon atoms.
C. Ether has one oxygen atom and ethanol has two oxygen atoms.
D. The arrangement of the carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen atoms in
the two hydrocarbons is different.
30. In 1861, Charles Darwin, a naturalist who formulated the theory of
evolution, remarked that the science of geology had made much

progress in his lifetime. He wrote, “About thirty years ago there was
much talk that geologists ought only to observe and not theorize;
and I well remember someone saying that at this rate a man might as
well go into a gravel-pit and count the pebbles and describe the
colors. How odd it is that anyone should not see that all observation
must be for or against some view if it is to be of any service!”
Which of the following statements best summarizes Darwin’s view of
the role of observation in science?
A. Observation is the best way to gather facts about any aspect of
nature.
B. Observation is useful as long as it is supported by statistics.
C. Observation should be used only in the field of geology.
D. Observation is useful as long as the
results are used to support or disprove a hypothesis.
31. Directions: Match each process to an example of that process.
The four types of processes that create minerals in Earth’s crust are
called magmatic, hydrothermal, metamorphic, and surficial.
Magmatic processes involve the heating and cooling of magma deep
inside the Earth’s mantle to form crystals. Hydrothermal processes are
caused by the movement of water within Earth’s crust. Metamorphic
processes involve combinations of heat, pressure, time, water, and
various solutions to change existing mineral deposits and form new
ones. Surficial processes are physical processes that affect rock at
Earth’s surface or in the loose material—soil and dust—that covers
Earth’s crust.
Type of Process
Magmatic
Hydrothermal
Metamorphic
Surficial

Example of Process

A. Wind eroding away the softer components in sandstone
B. A gradual increase in temperature in the mantle, followed by a
sudden drop in temperature
C. Movement of seawater through fractured rock underground
D. Fault lines fracturing rock into particles underground and then
those particles undergoing great heat and pressure
Question 32 refers to the following graph.
Rainfall in 5 Cities in California, 2008–2010
2008−2009 Rain
(in.)

2009−2010 Rain
(in.)

Crescent City

49.35

62.77

Eureka

29.75

44.51

Ukiah

22.68

40.52

Redding

23.71

30.45

Sacramento

16.33

20.74

Source: Golden Gate Weather Services

32. Which city had the median increase in rainfall between the two time
periods displayed in the table? Write your answer in the box below.

33. Brock’s physics teacher has assigned everyone in his class the task of
conducting an experiment. To write up their experiments, everyone must
use the outline provided below.
Match each summary of the steps in Brock’s experiment to the

appropriate category in the experiment outline.
Experiment Outline

Brock’s Steps

Step 1. Formulate a question about a
phenomenon
Step 2. Collect data
Step 3. Form a hypothesis
Step 4. Test the hypothesis through an
experiment
Step 5. Draw a conclusion
A. Brock placed wooden cubes that were 1 cc, 10 cc, and 100 cc in
water. He observed their buoyancy. Then he placed iron cubes of 1 cc,
10 cc, and 100 cc in water and observed their buoyancy.
B. Brock noted that ice floats in water, whether it is a small ice cube or
a huge iceberg.
C. Brock said: “Since all wooden cubes float and all iron cubes sink,
size does not affect the buoyancy of an object in water.”
D. Brock asked, “Does size affect the buoyancy of an object in water?”
E. Brock thought: “For an object made of a given material, increasing
the size of the object won’t affect its buoyancy in water.”
34. In 1993, after years of fluctuating water levels in their reservoir, the
residents of Weyland County built a dam at one end of the reservoir to
regulate and stabilize the water levels. Circle the X on the graph below
that most likely represents 1993.

35. One property of a gas is that its molecules spread out to fill their
container. Which of the following best illustrates this property of gases?
A. A teacher’s perfume can be detected at the back of the classroom.
B. Rain puddles evaporate more quickly when the sun comes out.
C. Water is produced when hydrogen gas is burned in oxygen gas.
D. Liquid oxygen is denser than gaseous oxygen.
36. The gravitational force between two celestial objects can be calculated
using the formula F = Gm1m2/d2, where m1 and m2 are the masses of the
two objects, d is the distance between them, and F is measured in
newtons. If the mass of the sun is 2 × 1030 kg, the mass of the Earth is 6 ×
1024 kg, the distance from the Earth to the sun is 1.5 × 1011 m, and the
gravitational constant G is 6.67 × 10-11 N m2 kg-2, what is the
gravitational force between the Earth and the sun?
A. 5.34 × 1011 N
B. 3.56 × 1022 N
C. 5.34 × 1033 N
D. 3.56 × 1044 N

End of the Science Test

Answers and explanations begin on page 723.

GED® Answers and Explanations
Ged® Pretest Answers and Explanations
Reasoning through Language Arts
Part I: Reading, page 2
1. B. There are advantages to being sensitive and introverted. The main
idea of a passage is the idea that is most important to the author. The
author wrote this passage to convey the idea that being introverted can be
beneficial. Choices (C) and (D) both contain ideas the author expresses,
but neither of those are the main idea of the entire passage. Choice (A)
might be a reasonable inference based on the fifth paragraph, but it is not
the author’s main point.
2. A. empathetic The fourth paragraph states that children with sensitive
temperaments are “more likely than their peers to be described by parents
and caregivers as empathetic or conscientious.” Choice (B) is contradicted
by the author’s statements that sensitive children tend to grow up to be
introverts, and that introverts are less likely than others “to take dangerous
risks.” The author says explicitly that sensitive children “are not
antisocial,” so choice (C) is incorrect. Choice (D) is not supported by the
passage.
3. C. a successful collaboration between an introvert and an extrovert
The author mentions the partnership between Jobs and Wozniak in order
to support her point that “[m]any successful ventures are the result of
effective partnerships between introverts and extroverts.”
4. C. Children who are perceived as “shy” are actually more sensitive
than other children to stimuli in their environments. The author’s
purpose in the second paragraph is to help her readers understand the
temperaments of the so-called “shy” children introduced in the first
paragraph.

5. A. enjoying a quiet dinner with a handful of friends The author explains
that introverts are not antisocial, so an introvert will not necessarily prefer
to be alone. However, introverts are more sensitive to stimuli in their
environment, so an introvert would not be likely to prefer (B) loud dance
music or (C) a crowded street festival. Moreover, the author says that
introverts are “less likely to take dangerous risks,” and you can infer that
(D) “ice-slope surfing” is a dangerous sport.
6. B. The driver may have some difficulty in controlling the forklift.
Paragraphs one and two discuss rear-wheel steering in forklifts. According
to the second paragraph, rear-wheel steering is the reason why forklifts are
not as responsive as cars and can be difficult to control.
7. A. driving a forklift and driving a car The first and second paragraphs
discuss the differences between driving a car and driving a forklift.
8. D. A forklift that is traveling downhill with a heavy load should travel
backward. The third paragraph explains that, when driving a forklift with
a load on an incline, “you must keep the load on the uphill side.” The
graphic reinforces this by showing a forklift with the load on the uphill
side. The arrow above the graphic points in two directions, and this
suggests that the forklift should keep its load on the uphill side and travel
backwards when going downhill.
9. C. to explain safe practices to forklift drivers The author is primarily
concerned with helping drivers of forklifts understand and use safe
practices. The author’s primary focus is on safety, not on convincing
people that forklifts are dangerous, as choice (B) suggests, or describing
different kinds of forklift drivers, as choice (D) suggests. The differences
between driving a car and driving a forklift, mentioned in choice (A), are
discussed in the passage. However, the author’s purpose in discussing
those differences is to help forklift drivers understand how to operate
forklifts safely.
10. A. The author lists potential dangers inherent in forklift driving and
explains how to avoid them. Each paragraph discusses a different
potential danger of forklift driving: first paragraph: the forklift’s wide
swing when turning; second paragraph: the difficulty of controlling a
forklift; third paragraph: the dangers of driving on an incline with the load
facing downhill; fourth paragraph: large loads that obstruct the driver’s

view. Each paragraph also discusses how best to deal with those dangers.
11. B. suggest that GMO foods can be beneficial to struggling farmers
This detail supports the overall purpose of the passage—to highlight the
benefits of GMO foods for world food production. The fact that “small,
resource-poor farmers” would choose to produce GMO crops implies that
these are more reliable and potentially more lucrative than natural crops.
12. D. the safety and reliability of GMO foods Passage 2 primarily
discusses how GMO foods can pose a threat to human health and how
GMO crops can be especially susceptible to massive failures.
13. B. The labels of some foods containing GMO ingredients do not
indicate that the products contain genetically-modified components.
The last sentence of the first paragraph states that the American Academy
of Environmental Medicine called for “the labeling of all food items
containing genetically modified products.” Therefore, at least some GMO
foods do not yet have this labeling.
14. C. GMO foods are largely a positive development for global food
production The authors of the two passages disagree primarily about
whether GMO foods are beneficial or dangerous.
15. C. paragraph 4 In Passage 1, paragraph 4 details how GMO corn crops
survived a devastating drought that natural corn crops would not have
been able to withstand. This addresses the issue of reliability raised by the
example of the South African corn in Passage 2.
16. C. a young horse The context clues in the passage indicate that the
speaker is actually a horse. In paragraph 2, we learn that the speaker’s
mother “whinnied,” and in paragraph 4, she is specifically referred to as a
horse. In paragraph 5, the speaker mentions that he and his mother are the
master’s favorites among all of the horses.
17. D. a farm The description of the setting in paragraph 1 indicates that the
story takes place in a rural location. In paragraph 6, the speaker’s
reference to an event that occurred in his “field” also supports this setting.
18. B. contented The overall tone of the speaker’s account is positive. The
passage describes the pleasant setting of his childhood, the respect he had
for his mother, and the kind treatment he received from his master. Even
the one negative memory, the occasional teasing by the plowboy, serves to

show how the speaker was cared for by his master.
19. A. affectionate and protective Paragraph 5 describes the master’s gentle
way of treating his horses. Paragraph 7 recounts how the master punished
the young boy who was harming the horses.
20. A. correct the speaker for playing too roughly The mother’s speech is
introduced in paragraph 2 after the phrase “when there was a good deal of
kicking.” Toward the end of the speech in paragraph 3, the mother
implores the speaker to “grow up gentle and good” and “never bite or kick
even in play.”
Part II: Writing and Language Skills, page 10
1. D. your child’s class has been Thes third-person singular subject student
requires the verb form has.
2. C. symptoms, such as Choice (C) correctly joins the list of symptoms to
the main clause. Choice (A) creates a sentence fragment. Choices (B) and
(D) create two independent clauses without joining them with
conjunctions.
3. B. develops any of these symptoms, take him or her to the doctor The
verb should be in the present tense because the action is occurring in the
present. Moreover, the present tense is consistent with the majority of
verbs in the passage.
4. C. sentence 5 Sentences 1–4 explain basic facts about strep throat.
Sentences 5–10 explain what parents should do if their child has strep
throat.
5. A. In addition, antibiotics may Generally, an introductory phrase is
followed by a comma.
6. A. After the fever is gone and your child has taken Combining the detail
about taking medicine and the detail about the fever into an introductory
subordinate clause results in a smooth, effective sentence.
7. C. bet on a football game or buy a lottery ticket No comma is needed
between two verbs in a compound predicate (bet on a football game or
buy a lottery ticket).

8. C. threatens The action is always true, so the present tense is correct.
Moreover, the present tense is consistent with the majority of verbs in the
passage.
9. D. Compulsive gamblers display a number of consistent traits. This is
the only topic sentence that sums up the main point and is neither too
specific nor too general.
10. A. it. Losing Choice (A), which forms two complete sentences, is the only
choice given that avoids errors. Choice (B) joins two independent clauses
but omits the necessary comma. Choice (C) creates a comma splice.
Choice (D) is incorrect because a comma must precede and in a compound
sentence.
11. A. commit fraud, forgery, or theft Commas are required between items
in a series.
12. A. depressed, or they A comma should precede a coordinating
conjunction that joins independent clauses.
13. B. People often make impulse buys at pet stores This term pet stores
should not be capitalized, because it is not the name of a store; it is just a
type of store. That eliminates choices (A) and (C). Choice (D) is
needlessly wordy.
14. D. when the owners find they can’t care for the animals The antecedent
owners is plural, so they is the correct pronoun to use. Choice (B) is
incorrect because of its awkward construction.
15. A. There are several factors to consider The verb agrees with the
subject, “several factors,” which is plural. Choice (D) is incorrect because
it suggests that the factors are doing the considering.
16. C. be housebroken and trained Only choice (C) has both verbs in
parallel structure and creates a correct sentence.
17. D. remove sentence 10 The sentence about exercise and people is not
relevant to pets, the topic of the article.
18. D. if the animal is unhealthy The statement is always true, so the present
tense is correct. Moreover, the present tense is consistent with the majority
of verbs in the passage.

Part III: Extended Response, page 16
Your responses to questions 1 through 5 may vary but should be similar to
the following:
1. identity theft
2. explain how people can become vulnerable to identity theft
3. specific information from the reading selection
4. to explain something
5. There are several things you can do to protect yourself from identity theft.
Your responses to questions 6 and 7 may vary. Sample responses are below.
6. People might become vulnerable to identity theft if they are careless about
papers, information access, or online activities.
7. (1) Identity thieves might go through a person’s garbage looking for
financial papers. (2) You shouldn’t have checks sent to your mailbox
unless your mailbox locks. (3) You should update your anti-spyware
software to protect yourself from identity theft.
8. Planning Checklist Check off each task that you performed. Give yourself
a score of 0–3 based on how many checks you made.
_______ I wrote a central idea (thesis statement) for my response.
_______ I made a plan for what I wrote.
_______ In my plan, I related each point to a piece of evidence or
information in the text.
9. Drafting Checklist Check off each task that you performed. Give yourself a
score of 0–5 based on how many checks you made.
_______ I wrote an introduction to my response based on my central idea
(thesis statement).
_______ I developed several paragraphs responding to the prompt.
_______ In my response, I cited specific evidence from the text to support
my central idea.
_______ In my response, I provided additional relevant information based

on my own knowledge and perspectives.
_______ I wrote a conclusion that summarized my position or restated my
central idea in a different way.
10. Revising and Editing Checklist Give yourself a score of 0–6 based on how
many checks you made.
_______ My piece was well organized, or I improved its organization so
that one idea relates to another.
_______ I made sure that my sentences were complete, clear, and correct.
_______ Each of my paragraphs has a central idea and supporting
evidence from the text.
_______ My piece has a clear beginning, middle, and ending.
_______ I corrected subject-verb agreement, pronoun agreement, and verb
tense errors.
_______ I corrected punctuation, capitalization, and spelling errors.

Mathematical Reasoning
Part I: Quantitative Reasoning, page 18
1. D. between 1,200 and 1,300 The graph shows that roughly 900 customers
came from Zone 3 during this period, and that somewhere between 300
and 400 customers came from Zone 4 during the same period. Thus,
adding them together will result in a number between 1,200 and 1,300.
2. D. 1:2 The bar for Zone 1 is a little less than halfway between 400 and
500, so round up to 450. The best estimate for the bar for Zone 3 is 900.
Make sure you write the ratio in the order stated in the problem. Zone 1:
Zone 3 = 450:900, which simplifies to 1:2.
3. C. 16 Divide 10 by

. The answer is 16 with a remainder. Since the

question asks for how many bowls the potter can complete, ignore the
remainder.
4. B. 3 The graph doesn’t give the actual number of hours Janelle will work,

but it does show how her time spent at one activity compares to another. If
she works 100 hours, she will spend 44 hours working at the counter, 9
hours processing new books, and 6 hours repairing bindings. Compare 44
to 15. The number 44 is about 3 times as great as 15.
5. C. 160 To solve, set up a ratio.

. Set that equal to the

ratio of employees who make minimum wage to the total number of
employees, and use a variable to represent the total number of employees.
. Cross multiply: 24 × 100 = 2400. Divide: 2400 ÷ 15 = 160.
6. D. Y, W, Z, X Compare the numbers and list in order from smallest to
largest: $2.80, $27.10, $27.20, $261.00.
7. B. 9.25 Add together the amounts of honey the cook will use in the two
recipes: 2.5 + 4.25 = 6.75. Subtract that amount from the total amount of
honey in the jar. 16 − 6.75 = 9.25.
8. C. 21 One way to solve the problem is to find a number that is evenly
divisible by 6 and 14, and then try dividing that number by each of the
answer choices. Go through the multiples of 14 until you find one that is
divisible by 6: 14, 28, 42. The number 42 is divisible by both 14 and 6.
Then review the answer choices. 42 cannot be evenly divided by 8, 12, or
28. It can be evenly divided by 21.
9. D. 13 Work backward through the facts. Sheila has worked 10 years.
Kathy has worked half as long as Sheila, which equals 5 years. Alice has
worked 8 years longer than Kathy. 5 + 8 = 13 years.
10. C.

Two sections, which equal

chance of not getting blue is

or

, are marked “blue.” Thus, the
.

11. A. 25% To find percent of change, divide the amount of change by the
original price. Then multiply by 100 to change the result from a decimal to
a percent:

.

12. C. 5.5 The median is the middle number of a group of numbers. Arrange
the numbers of accounts in order: 2, 4, 4, 4, 5, 6, 6, 7, 7, 8. The middle
numbers are 5 and 6. When there are two numbers in the middle, find the

mean of those two numbers:

.

13. A. $4,500 Add together the amounts that Jim has sold so far in April:
$2,500 + $5,000 = $7,500. Then subtract that amount from the minimum
his employers expect him to sell: $12,000 − $7,500 = $4,500.
14. C.

Subtract the length of the shorter stick from the length of the

longer one:

. To solve, find a common denominator:
.

15. C. 3.75 The number line is divided into increments, each of which equals
one-fourth, or 0.25. The dot is three increments to the right of the number
3, so its value is 3.75.
16. D. More students received either an A or a B than received either a D
or an F. Based on the graph, 6 students received an A and 7 students a B.
7 + 6 = 13. Also, 7 students received a D, and 3 received an F. 7 + 3 = 10.
Since 13 is greater than 10, the A-and-B group is larger than the D-and-F
group. Choice (A) is not supported because some students did fail the
exam. Choice (B) suggests that most—more than half—of Marjorie’s
students received an A or B. However, the A-and-B group (13 students) is
smaller than the total number of students who got a C (12 students), a D (7
students), or an F (3 students, for a total of 22 students). Choice (C) is
unsupported because the graph has no information about how any other
group of students would perform.
17. D. $6,000 Use the formula provided to find the interest Jason’s deposit
would earn over the five years. As directed, express the percent interest as
a decimal, 0.04. $5000 × 5 (years) × 0.04 = $1000. Then, to find out how
much is in the account at the end of the five years, add that interest to
Jason’s original deposit: $5,000 + $1,000 = $6,000.
18. C. 720 To find out how many possible orderings, or sequences, of six
items are possible, multiply. There are six possibilities for the first movie.
Then after the first movie has been chosen, there are five possibilities for
the second movie, then four for the third movie, and so on: 6 × 5 × 4 × 3 ×
2 × 1 = 720.

Part II: Algebraic Reasoning and Geometry, page 23
1. B. point B Convert the improper fraction to a mixed fraction:
, which is the value of point B.
2. C. 4 Substitute and simplify:
2x − (4y − 3) + 5xz
= 2(−3) – [4(2) – 3] + 5(−3)(−1)
= −6 – (8 – 3) + 15
= −6 − 5 + 15
= −11 + 15
=4
3. A. 54 To find the magnitude of the change in temperature, subtract the
lowest temperature from the highest temperature: 46 − (−8) = 46 + 8 = 54.
4. B. 60 The tower, its shadow, and the distance between them form a right
triangle. Use the Pythagorean relationship to find the missing distance:

5. A. 18 To find the volume of a rectangular prism, multiply length × width ×
height. Here, however, the question asks for the volume in feet, while the
measurements are given in inches. Therefore, start by converting the
inches of model 413S to feet: 24 in. × 72 in. × 18 in. = 2 ft × 6 ft × 1.5 ft =
18 ft3.
6. C. $2,600 The question stem gives us two equations. First, we know that M
+ L = 4,680. Also, since Levy earns $520 more than Matthew earns, that
can be expressed as L = M + 520, or, put another way, M = L − 520. Since
the question asks for a solution for Levy, substitute the value of M from
the second equation in the first equation:

7. C. 16π The formula for the surface area of a cone is SA = πrs + πr2. In that
formula, SA means surface area, r represents the radius, and s is the slant
height, or the distance from the bottom of one side of the cone to the point.
The diagram indicates that the diameter of the base is 4, so its radius is 2. The
slant height is 6. Substitute and simplify:
SA = π(2)(6) + π(2)2
SA = 12π + 4π = 16π
8. D. 5x3 − 4x2 − x + 12y Start by removing the parentheses:
3x3 + x + 2x3 – 4x2 + 14y − 2(y + x)
= 3x3 + x + 2x3 − 4x2 + 14y − 2y − 2x.
Then, identify like terms that can be combined:
3x3 and 2x3, which add to 5x3.− 4x2 cannot be combined with any other
term.
x and −2x add to − x.
14y and −2y add to 12y.
Combine into a new expression: 5x3 − 4x2 − x + 12y.
9. (2, 4) On scratch paper, draw the three points given in the question stem:

The fourth corner of the rectangle will be at (2, 4).
10. A. 18 − 2x Simplify: 4x − 2(3x − 9) = 4x − 6x + 18 = −2x + 18. That can
also be expressed as 18 − 2x.
11. D. 4 The simplest way to solve this problem is to try the values of x given
in the answer choices in the equation. Starting with choice (A), where x
equals −4: 3(−4)2 − 10(−4) = 3(16) + 40 = 88. That’s a great deal more
than 8. That result suggests that choice (B), where x equals −3, would also
be likely to yield a result that’s far too large. Try choices (C) or (D) to see
what result a positive number yields. In choice (C), x equals 3: 3(3)2 −
10(3) = 3(9) − 30 = −3. That’s a little too small, so the answer must be
choice (D), x equals 4. Try it to confirm: 3(4)2 − 10(4) = 3(16) − 40 = 8.
Choice (D) is correct.
12. D. x < 4 Solve the inequality:

13. B. 4.54 × 109 Writing a number in scientific notation involves expressing
it as the product of two terms: one term is a number and the other is 10
raised to some power. To find how large the power of ten should be,
imagine counting spaces to the left of the decimal point. Choice (B)
reflects the correct number and the correct power of 10, or places to the

left of the decimal point.
14. D. 204 The shape of Joe’s new property is a trapezoid, and the formula for
the area of a trapezoid is
. In that formula, A is area, and h
means the height, which is 12 yards here. The variables b1 and b2 are the
two bases, which here are 10 yards and 24 yards. Plug those values into
the formula: A =
(34) = 204. (You can tell that Joe’s
property is a trapezoid because the two bases are parallel; the right angles
indicated at the two ends of the height line indicate this.)
15. A. p = $5.00 − (n − 1)$0.50 If a customer requests only one monogram,
the fee is $5.00. However, if a customer requests 2, the price per
monogram drops by $0.50 (which you can think of as 1 × $0.50). If a
customer requests 3 monograms, the price per monogram drops another
$0.50, or 2 × $0.50 in total. Thus, the price per monogram is $5.00 minus
a multiple of $0.50. The multiple is one less than the number of hats
ordered.
16. B. 70° In any four-sided figure, all four interior angles add up to 360°. In a
parallelogram, the two obtuse angles are equal to one another, and the two
acute angles are equal to one another. Here, you know that the two obtuse
angles add up to 220°, so 360° − 220° = 140°. Since there are two acute
angles, divide that number by two.
17. C.
The answer choices are in slope-intercept form, so begin by
finding the y-intercept, which is 2. Then find the slope, which represents
. Find two points on line H, and count the difference between the ycoordinates for those two points in order to find the rise. Then count the
difference between the x-coordinates for those two points to find the run.
For each vertical increase of two (rise), the line moves three numbers on
the horizontal axis (run). Thus, the slope is , and the equation is
.
18. A. 20π The question asks for the circumference of the pool. The question
stem gives the distance from the middle of the pool to the edge—that’s the
radius of the circle, which is half the diameter. Thus, the diameter of the
circle is 20 feet. Plug that into the formula for the circumference of a
circle: C = dπ. C = 20π.

19. D. 2 The slope of a line can be expressed as

. To find the slope using

two points, subtract one y-coordinate from another to find the rise, and
subtract one x-coordinate from another to find the run. It does not matter
which point you subtract from the other, as long as you are consistent
about which point you are subtracting when finding both rise and run.
.
20. C. 192 π The formula for the volume of a cylinder is V = πr2h.
In that formula, V is volume, r is the radius of the base, and h is height. In
this case, you know that the diameter of the base of the can is 8, so the
radius is 4. Plug in the values: V = π × (4 cm)2 × (12 cm) = π × 16 cm2 ×
12 cm = 192π cm3.
21. D. 4,100 To find the area of a compound figure like this one, split it up
into simpler shapes. Here, the space can be split into two rectangles:

Find the area of the two rectangles and add those two areas together: (70 ×
50) + (30 × 20) = 3,500 + 600 = 4,100 ft2.
22. D. (2, 5) There are two ways to solve this problem. First, you could graph
both lines. After doing so, your scratchwork should have looked like this:

Based on that sketch, the two lines intersect at (2, 5), which means that
those coordinates are the solution to the system of equations.
Alternatively, you could also have plugged each answer choice into both
equations in order to find the answer choice that works in both equations.
For example, to test choice (A) in this way:
Plug (2, −5) into the first equation: 3x − 3y = −9

Answer choice (A) does not work in the first equation. Therefore, it is
incorrect, and there is no need to try choice (A) in the second equation.
Try the other answer choices in a similar way. Only choice (D) will work
in both equations.

Social Studies
Part I: Social Studies Practices, page 28
1. C. The Voting Rights Act of 1965 gave the federal government
oversight of state elections to end barriers against African American
voting. The passage described the historical events that led to the Voting
Rights Act, and how this legislation ended the voting discrimination that
certain states enacted after the passage of the Fifteenth Amendment.
2. C. interpretation According to the passage, the terms “strict construction”
and “loose construction” refer to different ways in which people interpret
the range of powers that the Constitution grants to the federal government.
3. A. The FDA’s new regulations would place a financial hardship on
small food retailers. According to the passage, smaller food retailers
would feel more of the burden than larger establishments, and the
Common Sense Nutritional Disclosure Act seeks to relieve this burden.
4. C. “devastating” This word highlights the author’s point of view that the
FDA’s new regulations would be especially harmful to smaller food
retailers.
5. D. The argument is invalid, because it attempts to refute one reason
against doing something while ignoring other possible reasons. The
paragraph states that possible danger to the porcupine caribou is “one
commonly cited” reason against drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife
Refuge. This implies that there are other reasons as well. Thus, the
author’s conclusion that “we have no reason not to drill in the ANWR” is
unsupported, since the author has attempted to refute only one of the
possibly many reasons against drilling in the refuge.
6. A. Some people depend on the porcupine caribou for food. The primary
evidence in this argument is that almost all of the species that have ever

lived on Earth have gone extinct, and the vast majority of these extinctions
happened naturally. The author uses this evidence to argue that the human
threat to the porcupine caribou isn’t a big deal. However, the author fails
to consider the possibility that human-caused extinctions are worse than
naturally-occurring ones. Choice (A) shows that the loss of the caribou by
human hands would cause a severe problem: the loss of a major food
source for some people.
7. B. The map shows that most of the Warsaw Pact countries lay between
the Soviet Union and Western countries, including France, West Germany,
and Great Britain. The passage states that the World War II Allies, which
included France and Great Britain, formed NATO. It also states that West
Germany was allowed to join NATO. And the map makes clear that the
smaller Warsaw Pact countries lay geographically between those nations
and the Soviet Union.
8. A. In forming the Warsaw Pact, the Soviet Union greatly increased its
access to oceanic coastline. Although most of the Warsaw Pact countries
touched a body of water, most of their borders were land borders, and two
of the Warsaw Pact countries were completely landlocked.
9. A. 40

The three northernmost states are Maine (ME), New Hampshire

(NH), and Vermont (VT). To find the average, sum the rainfall of each
state and divide by 3:
.
10. B. steadily increased, surpassing that of white voters in the 2012
elections The solid gray line corresponds to the rate at which black voters
participated in presidential elections. It increases consistently from year to
year, and shows the highest rate of all groups in the 2012 election.
Part II: Social Studies Content, page 32
1. B. the West Indies to the British colonies; the British colonies to
Africa; Africa to the West Indies According to the map, the West Indies
exported sugar and molasses to the British colonies in North America. The
British colonies exported rum to Africa. Finally, Africa exported slaves
and gold to the West Indies. The trade routes formed a triangle.
2. A. Cargo ships never had to sail empty on any leg of a profitable

triangular journey. This is a general conclusion that is supported by the
details of the map, which show goods traveling along each leg of the
triangular trade route. Therefore, a very profitable journey must have
meant a ship carried cargo on each leg of the route. The remaining options
state details that may or may not be confirmed by the map.
3. B. commercial bank According to the descriptions, commercial banks
provide services to businesses and other corporations. None of the other
descriptions describe financial institutions making loans to companies.
They focus either on national financial systems or on individual
borrowers.
4. B. tainted system “Tainted” is a loaded word that indicates the author’s
belief that a “strong-mayor” system is inherently corrupt.
5. D. No, because no indication is given that the current mayor will
behave as past mayors did. A strong-mayor system may enable, but does
not guarantee, corruption. Past corruption is not by itself enough reason to
have a strong suspicion toward the current government.
6. D. serving on a jury Serving on a jury, like voting, is a civic duty of each
citizen. It is a way to participate in the judicial branch of government.
Note that although choice (B), displaying the American flag, is a patriotic
act, it does not involve participating in government in any way and so is
not a way of participating in the political system.
7. D. law and order The hallmark of military rule is strict control over the
citizenry; in other words, law and order.
8. C. The French president has the power to dissolve the legislature,
while the U.S. president does not. The checkmark in the last row under
“France” indicates that the French president can dissolve the legislature.
The U.S. president does not have this power.
9. B. Of all the presidents shown, the French president has the greatest
variety of powers. This statement is a conclusion, a generalization based
on the details in the chart. Choices (A), (C), and (D) are specific details
from the chart.
10. D. The U.S. Supreme Court ruling in Plessy v. Ferguson was wrong
because it infringed on freedoms guaranteed in the Constitution. This
statement is a rephrasing of the dissenting justice’s opinion, or belief,

about the case. The other statements are all facts from the paragraph.
11. A. The nation’s debt increased at a faster rate than did the U.S.
population during the period shown on the graph. You can tell this is
true because the per capita debt figure increased steadily from 1990 to
2010. This would happen only if the debt increased faster than the
population of the United States.
12. D. raise taxes and cut spending You can conclude from the text that to
cut the national debt, the U.S. government would have to increase income
(raise taxes) and lower costs (cut spending).
13. C. A drought was significantly worsened due to lack of native
vegetation. According to the passage, the deforestation caused a
significant portion of the drought that led to the Mayan collapse. Choices
(A) and (D) are both causes, not effects, of the deforestation.
14. C. Many cities had large populations because nearby coal and iron ore
deposits meant jobs. Coal and iron ore were among the most important
raw materials of the Industrial Revolution. By examining the relationship
of the location of the cities to that of the coalfields and iron ore deposits,
you can conclude that Great Britain’s most populous cities (with the
exception of London) were large partly because of their proximity to the
important raw materials of the Industrial Revolution. The remaining
statements are details from the map.
15. B. Great Britain’s acceptance of Germany’s takeover of Austria and
Czechoslovakia in the late 1930s Of all the options, this is the only one
that has the element of concession without opposition that is the hallmark
of appeasement.
16. D. People value the lives of their children more than they value
money. This is the underlying assumption of the poster: that Americans
have been willing to send their sons into battle where they risk their lives,
but haven’t been donating money to the war cause with equal willingness.
The poster thus plays upon their sense of guilt.
17. B. World War I The poster is dated 1917, so the war is World War I.
18. D. ads on social media Today, the government could probably reach the
most people with online ads rather than print ads because so many people
use social media.

19. D. The population of the colony of New York was smaller than that of
Connecticut. Since the chart shows the five colonies with the largest
populations in 1750, it follows that any colony not listed has a population
smaller than that of Connecticut, which ranked fifth. The other options are
not supported by the data in the table.
20. C. Applying for Civil Service Jobs This title best describes what the
flowchart shows—the steps in applying for a civil service job.
21. A. salary The GS rating of a job, based on the job description and the
candidate’s skills and experience, is directly related to the salary level of
the position. The other options would not be affected by the GS rating.
22. B. equal opportunity Since Civil Service jobs are open to all who apply
and are awarded on merit, they are designed to provide equal opportunity
for employment, regardless of gender, race, ethnicity, party affiliation, or
other factors.
23. C. 6 percent and $12,000 billion Locate 2005 on each graph. (Note that
each tic mark on the horizontal axis indicates a year, even if it is not
labeled.) The first graph shows the mortgage interest rate was about 6
percent in 2005. The second graph shows the total outstanding mortgage
debt was about $12,000 billion in 2005.
24. D. As interest rates rise and then fall, the total mortgage debt will
move similarly but not at the same rate. Look at the general trend
shown by each graph. Note that as interest rates rise and fall, the mortgage
debts rise similarly but fall at a different rate.
25. D. Hollywood, California, which produces movies and television
shows, enjoyed around the world The movies and television shows that
originate in Hollywood are distributed worldwide, helping to spread
American popular culture to other nations.

Science
Part I: Science Practices, page 40
1. C. “Hydrothermal Vents Suggest That Not All Life Is Solar-Powered”
The author’s main point is that some of the life forms around

hydrothermal vents derive energy from a source other than the sun. Choice
(C) captures that idea. Choices (A) and (B) mischaracterize the subject
matter of the passage, and choice (D) is far too broad.
2. D. No sunlight penetrates to the world of hydrothermal ocean vents.
Only choice (D) supports the idea that some life forms derive energy from
a source other than the sun. Choice (A) distorts the meaning of the first
line of the passage. Choice (B) is true but does not serve to support this
idea. Choice (C) is not stated in the passage.
3. D. Pitchblende contains an element that is more radioactive than
uranium. A hypothesis is a guess made by a scientist before the scientist
conducts an experiment. Before Marie Curie and her husband conducted
their experiment with pitchblende, she guessed that pitchblende was more
radioactive than pure uranium because pitchblende contained a radioactive
element other than uranium. Curie already knew choice (A) to be true, so
it was not a hypothesis she intended to test. Choice (B) is not stated in the
passage. Choice (C) describes the outcome of the Curies’ experiment, not
their initial hypothesis.
4. A. Pitchblende is more radioactive than pure uranium because it
contains polonium. As a result of their experiment, the Curies discovered
that pitchblende contained polonium, a highly radioactive element. This
suggests that Marie Curie’s initial hypothesis was correct. The remaining
choices are not supported by the passage.
5. B. The hole in the ozone layer reached its largest size after CFCs were
banned from production and use. According to the passage, the hole in
the ozone layer reached its largest size after CFCs were discontinued. The
presence of CFCs that remained in the atmosphere for years after use is a
likely explanation for this phenomenon.
6. B. While the ozone layer continues to thin, it is thinning at a rate much
lower than it has in the past. If the rate of ozone depletion has slowed
significantly, it is likely that the CFC ban was at least partially effective.
7. B. Adenosine triphosphate is broken down into adenosine
monophosphate and a pyrophosphate, releasing energy. The text
describes this relation between ATP (adenosine triphosphate), AMP
(adenosine monophosphate), and PPi (pyrophosphate).

8. D. Glycogen, which stores sugars that can be broken off in differing
amounts when the body needs energy Both glycogen and ATP store
energy, and both can release different amounts of energy depending on the
needs of the cell or organism.
9. A.

Because white is a recessive trait, a plant must have two white genes

(pp) in order to be white. Of the eight possible outcomes illustrated in the
Punnett squares, only one has this pair of genes.
10. B.

The difference between the drop height and the first bounce height

for the first drop was 1 foot. For the second, it was also 1 foot, and for the
third, 2 feet. Find these differences for all the drops. The average of a set
of items is the sum of the items divided by the number of items in the set.
Thus, to find the average here, add all the differences and divide by the
number of drops:

Part II: Science Content, page 44
1. C. Neurons transmit instructions regarding movement to muscles.
Since neurons transmit information and the function of muscles is to
move, it follows that neurons transmit instructions regarding movement to
muscles. The paragraph and the diagrams show that all the other options
contain incorrect information.
2. D. Comets formed when the solar system was born. Opinions are
usually signaled by words like “believe,” “think,” or “feel.” In this case,
the last sentence of the paragraph states that scientists believe that comets
formed when the solar system was born, showing that this is an opinion.
3. D. photosynthesis, in which green plants use the energy from sunlight
to make carbohydrates from water and carbon dioxide The key
element in a photochemical reaction is light. Of the options listed, only
photosynthesis involves light.
4. D. It helps control metabolism and growth. First, locate thyroxine in the
“Hormone” column, then move along the row to the “Function” column to

find the answer.
5. D. uncontrolled blood sugar levels The chart shows that insulin regulates
blood sugar levels, so problems with insulin production will cause
problems with blood sugar levels.
6. A. Growth hormone is only one of several factors that determine a
person’s adult height. Growth hormone alone does not determine height.
A person’s genetic make up—the height of his parents and other family
members—contributes, as do nutrition and the action of other hormones.
Paul’s expectations were therefore unrealistic.
7. C. oil and vinegar salad dressing This is an example of an emulsion—
two liquids mixed together but not dissolving. If you let oil and vinegar
dressing stand, the oil will rise to the top. The other options are all
solutions, which do not separate over time.
8. C. a meteorologist who studies weather patterns and predicts weather
Knowledge gained from a study of the atmosphere and hydrosphere is
closely related to the study of weather, which is influenced by both.
9. D. They are decomposers. Since earthworms are feeding on dead organic
matter, which comes from dead organisms, they must be decomposers.
10. B. switch from whole milk to 1 percent milk The switch from whole
milk to low-fat milk reduces fat intake by 3.5 grams/serving. While the
difference in saturated fat per serving is greater in cheddar cheese than in
milk, since the child drinks four servings of milk daily, this would be a
reduction of 14 grams per day. The reduction from switching cheeses
comes to 9.6 grams, since the child eats only two servings of cheese per
day.
11. A. moving your hand closer to the center of the revolving door Moving
your hand closer to the center of the door decreases distance to the pivot
point. Since the force remains the same in this case, when you multiply
distance times force you will come up with a lower number, which
indicates decreased torque.
12. A. coal/peat and natural gas Look on the circle graph for energy sources
occupying wedges of approximately the same size. The only two that are
about the same size are coal/peat and natural gas, indicating they provide
about the same proportion of energy consumed in the United States.

13. B. As European Americans moved from the East Coast westward
between 1620 and 1850, they cut down forests to build farms. The map
shows, and the paragraph implies, that the virgin forests of the eastern
United States were almost all cut down between 1620 and 1850. The
paragraph further implies that the forests were cut down for farmland,
which has since been abandoned. Based on this information, choice (B) is
the only conclusion that is supported by the map and the paragraph. The
map and the paragraph either lack support for or contradict the other
options.
14. B. the Northern Hemisphere First, locate June 21 on the diagram, then
examine the tilt of Earth. Note that at that time of year, the Northern
Hemisphere tilts toward the sun, and it is summer there.
15. D. On the first day of spring and fall, neither the Northern
Hemisphere nor the Southern Hemisphere is tilted toward the sun.
According to the diagram, on March 21 and September 23, Earth’s axis is
tilted neither toward nor away from the sun, so neither hemisphere is tilted
toward the sun. The remaining choices are not supported by the diagram.
16. D. A quadrat makes plant distribution estimates more reliable. This
option is a conclusion, or a general statement, that is supported by all the
details in the paragraph. The other options are specific details paraphrased
from the paragraph.
17. A.

Charles’s Law involves the relationship of a gas’s volume and
temperature. Since volume increases with increases in temperature, the
first graph must be correct. Note that you can eliminate choice (D)

immediately because it involves changes in pressure, and Charles’s Law
assumes that pressure remains constant.
18. B. Atoms are composed of subatomic particles. This is an assumption
made by the writer of the paragraph. He or she does not explain this but
assumes it is common knowledge. All the other options are statements
made or strongly implied in the passage.
19. D. The student should have divided the mass by the volume. The
paragraph states that density is calculated by dividing mass by volume.
The student did the reverse, which is incorrect. All of the other steps the
student followed were correct.
20. C. a mixture of metals According to the passage, the Anthony dollar was
made of a copper-nickel alloy, and the final Sacagawea dollar, of a
manganese, zinc, copper, and nickel alloy. From these examples, you can
infer that an alloy is a mixture of metals.
21. B. Like nickels, dimes, and quarters, the Anthony dollar was silvercolored and therefore not distinctive. The Mint wanted to replace the
Anthony dollar with a distinctive coin—a coin that looked different from
the coins already in circulation. Making the new coin out of the same
metals as the silver-colored Anthony dollar would not accomplish this.
22. D. hardy perennials Hardy plants withstand frost, so they are more likely
to survive than tender plants. Perennials come up and flower for many
years. Therefore hardy perennials are likely to provide the most flowers
with the least effort on the gardener’s part.
23. C. A viewer could not see anything through the telescope. The function
of the flat mirror is to redirect the light rays toward the eyepiece so the
viewer can see the object in the telescope’s sights. If the flat mirror were
removed, the reflection of the object would no longer be visible through
the eyepiece.
24. B. They help scientists analyze large amounts of data in a systematic
way. The ability of a computer to process lots of data, far more
systematically and quickly than a human being can, has helped speed up
and refine the drug discovery process, although the older methods of
running laboratory experiments and clinical trials are still also important.
25. B. The typhoid fever vaccine is only 50 to 80 percent effective. Because

getting vaccinated against typhoid fever does not completely eliminate the
traveler’s chance of getting the disease, it makes sense that he or she
should take extra precautions against contracting this food- and water
borne disease.
26. D. The full moon appears when the moon and the sun are on opposite
sides of the Earth, such that sunlight strikes the moon at a 180° angle.
The diagram shows that the phases of the moon are caused by the sun
striking the moon at different angles. The moon appears fully illuminated
(full moon) when the moon is directly opposite the sun (with the Earth
between them). At 90 degrees, the moon is 50% illuminated and is either
in the first quarter or third quarter phase.
27. C. The independent variable is glucose concentration of the dialysis
fluid, and the dependent variable is blood pressure. The independent
variable is what was intentionally varied in the study, and the dependent
variable is what was measured in the study. In the study, the glucose
concentration of the dialysis fluid was varied. Patients received dialysis
fluid either with or without glucose. So glucose concentration of the
dialysis fluid is the independent variable. The patients’ blood pressures
were measured, so blood pressure is the dependent variable.
28. A. Like charges repel, so the electrostatic repulsion of the negative
charges makes ATP less stable. Like charges repel, so the three
phosphate groups in ATP want to be far away from each other. This
electrostatic repulsion causes ATP to be less stable than AMP, which only
has one negatively charged phosphate group.

GED® Unit Answers and Explanations
Reasoning through Language Arts
Interpreting Nonfiction and Informational Text

Lesson 1: Main Ideas and Details
Practice 1, page 61

1. A. searching for a place to call home The author states this feeling
directly in the first two lines and in the last paragraph.
2. D. the gods The second sentence in the second paragraph says, “It was
ordained by the deities.”
3. D. It was simply part of their beliefs to follow the pole. The meaning of
the pole is explained beginning with the fourth sentence of the second
paragraph. The last sentence explains that the Chickasaws lacked sorrow
because they trusted the pole’s command.
4. C. understands that her tendency to search is part of her Chickasaw
heritage The details about the author’s search for a home, combined with
the information that “the search for a homeland is part of the Chickasaw
migration legend,” helps you understand this main idea.
5. D. accepts that she is Chickasaw You can see that the writer is saying
that her Chickasaw heritage is an inescapable part of who she is.

Lesson 2: Restatement and Summary
Practice 2, page 63
1. C. lack of proper paperwork As the writer discusses the problems, he
states that he wants an “itemized list” and “a proper bill of sale.” He does
mention the premium price, choice (D), but that price is the reason he
expects proper paperwork and is not a complaint in and of itself.
2. B. the car to be repaired free of charge if the cause of the problem is
discovered This expectation is stated in the fifth paragraph of the letter.
3. C. The service and warranty on the customer’s car have been
unacceptable. The letter is a detailed list of the customer’s complaints.
They can be summed up by saying that both the service and the warranty
have not been as promised.

Lesson 3: Application of Ideas
Practice 3, page 65
1. A. overcoming a bad habit The writer advises those trying to break free
of credit card debt: “Stick with it until you’re free again.”

2. B. never use the credit cards The last paragraph implies that the author
approves of using credit cards only once you have already gotten out of
debt, and then only for convenience. Thus, if you are in debt, you should
stop using your credit cards.
3. C. losing weight by avoiding all-you-can-eat buffets Basically, the
advice is that you gradually lose your debt by not adding anything to it.
This is similar to helping yourself lose weight by not adding to it with
portions of food you don’t need.
4. C. “Live within your means.” This statement can be inferred from the
advice “don’t borrow any more,” and “what I’m against is buying more on
your credit cards than you can pay for at the end of the month.”

Lesson 4: Cause and Effect
Practice 4, page 67
1. C. It affected nearly everyone. This answer summarizes the meaning of
the first two sentences of the passage.
2. A. Many people lost the mortgages on their homes. This answer is
stated in the first paragraph: “men and women who saw their mortgages
foreclosed.” Choices (B) and (D) are both mentioned as causes, not
effects, of the depression.
3. B. low worker incomes The second paragraph states, “but the actual cause
of the collapse was an unhealthy economy. . . . Most laborers . . . could not
afford to buy the automobiles . . . because their incomes were too low.”
4. B. They had little effect. The writer tells what Herbert Hoover did as
president to curb the depression (“loans to businesses and banks”) but then
states that “his efforts proved to be too little and too late.”
5. D. The depression left people emotionally scarred. The first paragraph
states, “No one who lived through those years . . . could ever completely
forget.” The statement about eating mustard that is provided in the
question addresses this emotional effect rather than issues related to
farmers, workers, the economy, or the number of individuals affected.

Lesson 5: Compare and Contrast

Practice 5, page 69
1. D. leave some of his possessions behind This answer is found in the
seventh and eighth lines of paragraph 1.
2. C. They provided milk and pulled wagons. The selection states that
“cows . . . gave milk all the way to the sink of the Humboldt where they
died, having acted as draught animals for several weeks after the oxen had
perished.”
3. A. the provisions of each group of travelers Each paragraph talks about a
different group and what it had to offer the wagon train. For example,
“Much in contrast to these men were four batchelors . . . who had a wagon
drawn by four oxen . . . cows following behind.”
4. A. be happy to have people who could cook and sew The writer was
interested in assessing how self-sufficient the group could be and what
each group could offer the entire wagon train. For example, she writes,
“but as he was a wagon maker and his companion a blacksmith by trade
and both were accommodating there were always ready hands to ‘pry the
wheel out of mire.’”
5. A. They must cooperate and work together. Throughout the excerpt is
evidence that all the travelers depended on each other for animals, food,
and physical help, such as pulling wagons out of the mud.

Lesson 6: Conclusions and Generalizations
Practice 6.1, page 71
1. A. It is rewarding and one of life’s joys. The passage states that “my
teacher’s genius . . . made the first years of my education so beautiful.”
She also delights in observing and learning from the tadpole.
2. D. insightful and grateful The writer has insight about the connection
between herself and the tadpole: “Thus I learned from life itself. At the
beginning I was only a little mass of possibilities.” The writer is also
grateful to her teacher: “nor has she ceased trying . . . to make my life
sweet and useful.”
3. C. show Helen how addition is used in everyday life You can apply what
you learn in the diary entry: “Thus I learned from life itself. . . . She has

never since let pass an opportunity to point out the beauty that is in
everything. . . .” The teacher would therefore probably use everyday life
situations to teach.
4. D. as an anecdote followed by a generalization based on the anecdote
The writer tells the story of the tadpoles (an anecdote) and relates it to her
attitude toward life and learning.
5. D. Their development is not entirely smooth. The writer describes the
tadpole having difficulty after leaping out of the bowl. This is similar to
the quotation about “the stony course” of a child’s education.
Practice 6.2, page 73
1. C. On the whole, temperatures are not rising. The writer states that
rising temperatures are “quite simply not what is happening,” based on the
cold temperatures of the day before.
2. A. Shady Hollow was hit with a record cold temperature yesterday.
This one piece of information is the example the author uses to support the
generalization that temperatures, generally speaking, are not rising.
3. D. nationwide data tables of temperatures from the 1980s through
today The author’s generalization suffers from being based on one
temperature reading. His generalization would be more likely to be valid if
informed by many temperature readings over time.

Lesson 7: Word Choice
Practice 7, page 75
1. D. the CoolForter blanket The first sentence of paragraph 2 tells you two
things about the CoolForter blanket: that “it works like an electric
blanket,” and that “it feels like a dream.”
2. B. to show that the blanket is a pleasant indulgence To “coddle” is to
treat gently or take care of a person. Choice (B) describes this idea.
3. A. fluid Many people associate the word chemical with toxicity or harm. A
more neutral word to describe the cooling substance without inaccurate
specificity is fluid.
4. C. bland The word bland indicates a lack of interesting features. Unlike

the word neutral, which also indicates a lack of characteristic features, the
word bland can carry a negative connotation.
5. D. It allows the consumer to compare the CoolForter’s energy usage to
that of a familiar item. The author’s choice of a light bulb, an item with
which most readers are probably familiar, emphasizes that the CoolForter
blanket will not use excessive amounts of energy.

Lesson 8: Writer’s Tone and Point of View
Practice 8, page 77
1. C. the Internet writers The writer mentions “Internet sass” and then goes
on to say that “you gotta love it” because it keeps writers “off the streets
and out of trouble.’’
2. A. The Internet reviews were much more interesting than the TV
show. The review states, “They [Internet writers] were taking hours and
hours of prime-time dross and turning it into decadent, amoral, sharp,
electronic gold.”
3. A. The show was boring. The reviewer’s main opinion of the show is that
it was bad and boring (“non-goings-on of the non-people in the nonhouse”). Someone yawning supports the idea of boredom.
4. C. informal and hip Phrases such as “the dude” and “you gotta love it”
contribute to an informal and modern, or hip, tone.
5. C. someone knowledgeable about the media The reviewer talks
knowledgeably about both television and the Internet.

Lesson 9: Text Structure
Practice 9, page 79
1. B. exposure to the cowpox disease As seen in the text, James’s recovery
from cowpox followed his exposure to it. Note that choice (D) refers to
Jenner exposing James to smallpox, not cowpox.
2. C. “After being exposed to the disease” The transition word After tells
the reader that James’s exposure came before his catching cowpox and
recovery from it. Thus, it gives the reader explicit information about the
order of the steps in the process.

3. B. A number of factors can damage a garden. As discussed in the
passage, factors such as weather, pests, and diseases can affect plants and
cause damage, undoing the time and work that have been invested.
Interpreting Nonfiction and Informational Text Practice Questions,
pages 80–83
1. D. hit a boy in the arm to get his attention The writer talks about
breaking a ruler over the head of a boy she likes; you can therefore
conclude that she would hit a boy in the arm to get his attention. She
responds physically and without much thought to consequences.
2. B. She was just pretending she didn’t want to go to the principal’s
office. The circumstances of Brer Rabbit pretending he was afraid to go
into the briar patch where he was born and raised are similar to the speaker
pretending to be afraid to go to the principal’s office.
3. C. unusual From the different examples of how Frank Doleman behaved
(allowing a young girl to play chess in his office and not punishing boys
sent to his office), you conclude that he was an unusual principal.
4. A. confident The additional information you get from the new quotation
and the examples of her behavior, plus the overall tone of the excerpt,
suggest a confident young girl.
5. C. concerned but hopeful The author is worried about the health impact
of soda consumption on teenagers. But she is also hopeful; in the last
sentence, she states that more can be done to reduce the consumption of
sugary beverages.
6. D. Young people will choose healthier beverages if they are better
educated about the dangers of consumption of sugared beverages. The
last paragraph supports this choice. Choice (A) is unsupported by the
passage: even though the author does not condemn the legal measures
mentioned in paragraph 2, you do not know whether she would support an
overall ban. Choice (B) is unsupported also; the author never mentions
diet soda.
7. C. Young people who drink these beverages regularly will eventually
suffer from the same ailments as those who drink soda regularly. The
author points out that, even though juice and energy drinks have somewhat

less sugar than soda, regular consumption of those products “is likely to be
just as damaging in the long term.”
8. B. effective to some extent After describing the measures, the author
begins paragraph 3 by stating, “These efforts appear to be paying off” but
goes on to explain why they may not fully solve the problem of sugar
consumption among teenagers.
9. C. reducing excessive consumption of soda The author is referring to the
efforts described in paragraph 2, all of which attempted to reduce soda
consumption.
10. C. The cost of mandated coverage will lessen the ability of NATS to
hire and supply temporary workers. This question is basically answered
in paragraph 2: “the cost of mandates could weaken the ability of the
temporary help industry to act as a ‘jobs bridge.’”
11. A. Many workers are losing their jobs and need temporary jobs until
they find permanent work again. The third paragraph explains this
reason.
12. D. to raise awareness of an issue The whole passage—plus knowledge of
who Edward A. Lenz is—helps you see that its purpose is to explain the
position of the NATS.
13. B. Women will not resort to wearing pants or other restrictive men’s
clothing. This statement and the lines that follow it help you see that
Stanton is saying men can wear their restrictive clothing; women want no
part of it.
14. D. a cloth worn around the neck By looking at the context clues—or
words around the word stock—you can see that it is something worn
around the neck.
15. B. speak up about current events This very direct speech of Stanton’s
indicates her straight-to-the-point personality. She is not interested in
criticism for its own sake but rather speaks up about issues she strongly
believes in.
16. A. Women are fighting for the right to vote. The phrase “over the horns
of bigotry” helps you see that women are fighting for something. The last
paragraph of the excerpt helps you see that they are fighting for the right

to vote.
Analyzing Nonfiction and Informational Text

Lesson 1: Purpose of Text
Practice 1, page 85
1. B. tell how creative engineers saved astronauts This passage is a
narrative about the process of saving the lives of the Apollo 13 astronauts,
including in particular the role of engineers. Choices (A), (C), and (D) are
all far too broad.
2. B. supports the writer’s main recommendation The writer recommends
that the state cut sales taxes on new vehicles. Preventing deaths with the
modern safety features on new cars is one of the reasons for this
recommendation.
3. D. inform about the historical importance of silk The passage begins by
discussing the “historical importance” of silk and continues throughout to
introduce new points about this topic.
4. C. It provides examples of silk’s historical importance in trade and
culture. Nomads traveling to China for silk and the creation of the “Silk
Road” are examples of silk’s importance.

Lesson 2: Effectiveness of Argument
Practice 2, page 87
1. B. The federal government should automatically raise the minimum
wage to match price increases. The author states that “[s]everal states
have taken the sensible step of automatically raising their minimum wage
to adjust for inflation and consumer price increases.” Later, she also states
that “the federal government should follow the lead of the states.” Thus,
the author is recommending that the federal government should adjust the
minimum wage for price increases. The rest of the passage serves to
support this recommendation.
2. D. Those states have systems superior to the federal system of manual
increases. The author’s main point is that the federal government should

adopt automatic minimum wage increases, as some states currently have
done. Thus, she believes that the states’ systems are better than the current
federal system.
3. C. Over the past 40 years, the federal minimum wage has not kept
pace with inflation. Choice (C) is a historical fact provided in the second
paragraph as evidence to support the writer’s argument.
4. B. Ensuring sustainable incomes for hardworking citizens is a
responsibility of lawmakers. The author states that lawmakers must
ensure stability for workers but does not justify why they must do so. She
assumes that this is part of the job lawmakers should do.

Lesson 3: Validity of Arguments
Practice 3, page 89
1. C. voting systems have been developed over time to address previous
systems’ flaws The writer introduces DRE voting, describes several
voting systems, and concludes by suggesting that DRE continues the trend
of new voting systems correcting some flaws while introducing others.
2. B. DRE voting avoids some problems associated with other voting
systems. The writer supports the assertion that DRE voting has addressed
some flaws of older DRE systems by listing problems that might be
encountered with other voting systems and then stating that DRE voting
avoids such problems.
3. A. Voter’s choices are immediately recorded digitally instead of
initially using a paper ballot. This is one of the facts that the writer cites
in support of the assertion that DRE voting addressed some flaws. The
other three answer choices cite facts that are included in the passage, but
those facts are all background information and do not give direct support
to the writer’s main point.
4. D. Audits of elections that use DRE demonstrate this system is more
accurate than paper ballots. The author asserts that DRE systems are the
safest and most accurate option available. If these systems have been
proven more accurate than paper ballots (one of the alternatives), then this
would strengthen the argument, so (D) is correct.

Lesson 4: Text Related by Theme or Topic
Practice 4, page 91
1. C. online piracy of music files Both passages are focused on reasons why
online piracy is harmful and the need to take further action.
2. B. additional action to combat online piracy is warranted because
piracy causes financial losses to the music industry The first passage
concludes that more must be done to prevent online piracy. The main
factual information the writer uses to support this thesis is information
about the financial damage that piracy causes.
3. A. Fear of piracy makes it difficult for new, experimental acts to get
signed. Both passages reach the same conclusion: more must be done to
prevent piracy of music files. Choice (A) is the only answer choice that
provides direct support for the conclusion of Passage 2, and, therefore,
also for that of Passage 1.
4. A. Online piracy of digital files has a harmful effect on the music
industry. Both authors provide different reasons as to why piracy is
potentially harmful, but both agree that it has a negative effect on the
industry.

Lesson 5: Text with Opposing Arguments
Practice 5, page 93
1. C. the MPAA movie rating system Each writer is making an argument
about the relevance and trustworthiness of the MPAA rating system.
2. B. The MPAA rating system is a useful tool for parents. The writer of
the Argument in Passage 1 uses information about the MPAA rating
system to support her argument that the system helps parents to make
sound decisions.
3. D. The MPAA rating system should not be trusted. In the second
sentence, the writer indicates that the MPAA rating system is not a useful
guide, and concludes by recommending that parents use a different source
of advice.
4. A. She largely approves of the MPAA rating system as a guideline for
parents. The passage provides no information about the writer’s own

child-rearing decisions, choice (B), or about her opinion of the effect of
the Hays Code on the movie industry, choice (D). Also, her statements
about the rating system are uniformly positive, making choice (C)
incorrect.

Lesson 6: Texts with Related Graphic Information
Practice 6, page 95
1. D. Governing parties can use their power to shape electoral districts to
their advantage. The passage and the figures focus on demonstrating how
gerrymandering works. Choices (A) and (B) are not supported at all by the
passage, and choice (C) is far too extreme.
2. B. Through gerrymandering, a governing party can be elected to a
greater number of seats than its voter support might otherwise allow.
The second paragraph describes how the second grid figure shows one
party winning 75 percent of the seats from 60 percent of the vote, rather
than the 50 percent of seats shown in the first grid figure.
3. A. They illustrate the advantages a party can obtain through
gerrymandering. As discussed in the passage’s second paragraph, the
figures show how a party can benefit from the process. While choices (C)
and (D) may or may not be true statements, they do not describe how the
figures support the passage.
Analyzing Nonfiction and Informational Text Practice Questions, pages
96–99
1. D. to discuss whether communication technology helps or hurts
relationships This answer choice reflects the scope of the article
introduced at the end of the first paragraph.
2. B. how technology affects interpersonal connections The question at the
end of paragraph 1 introduces this topic. Paragraph 2 discusses positive
effects of communication technology while paragraph 3 discusses a
negative effect.
3. D. The caption reveals that the woman’s friends will use their phones
during their visit. The caption is similar to a scenario described in the
first paragraph of the passage. In both cases, people are choosing to use

technology rather than to enjoy the company of those with whom they
have an established relationship.
4. B. New communication technologies may adversely impact important
human relationships. The author’s concluding paragraph discusses how
communication technology can connect us with so many people that we
have less time and energy to spend on relationships with friends and
family, and the caption of the image reveals that the visiting friends plan
to spend time on their phones rather than in conversing with one another.
5. B. the giant squid is the world’s longest cephalopod The author’s
introduction and conclusion both raise this point, and the evidence in the
paragraph supports this thesis.
6. D. The giant squid is longer than the colossal squid. The author
provides scientific evidence about the colossal squid to support the
passage’s main idea about the giant squid.
7. C. The length of the longest known colossal squid specimen is ten
meters. This factual evidence supports the author’s main idea.
8. A. The longest known colossal squid is ten meters long, so there is no
colossal squid longer than the longest giant squid. According to
paragraph 2, there are very few samples of colossal squid, and all of them
have been juveniles. It is improper to draw a conclusion about the entire
colossal squid species on the basis of such limited evidence.
9. B. mercury dental amalgam Though the authors have somewhat different
opinions on the subject, both passages are centrally about mercury dental
amalgam.
10. C. Mercury amalgam fillings should be banned because they are
unhealthy and bad for the environment. The first sentence of Passage 1
states that mercury amalgam should be banned for use in dental fillings.
The first paragraph cites health reasons for this opinion. The second
paragraph cites environmental reasons. Choice (D) is mentioned in
Passage 1, but it serves as support for the author’s main point.
11. D. It is a convincing statistic from a reliable source. The statement that
40–50 percent of mercury in wastewater is from an easily preventable
source is a convincing statistic. The EPA is a large non-political
government agency and so is likely to provide reliable information.

12. A. Consumers have no other reason, such as cost or durability, to
prefer mercury amalgam to composite fillings. The author of Passage 1
states that “banning mercury amalgam will create no consumer backlash”
because resin composite fillings are better for cosmetic reasons. The
author assumes that there is no other reason to prefer mercury amalgam.
13. B. Resin composite fillings look better than mercury amalgam fillings
when each is used on visible tooth surfaces. The author of Passage 2
states that amalgam is preferable to resin composite whenever there is no
cosmetic need for a tooth-colored filling. Thus, you can infer that he
believes that resin composite fillings look more like natural teeth than
mercury amalgam.
14. A. Passage 1, because it cites no sources for the study or the statistic it
cites The author of passage 1 says that “it has been estimated” that 4
percent of the mercury in Lake Superior comes from dental amalgam, but
the author cites no source. The author also gives no source for the 2001
study that is cited in the first paragraph.
15. D. Mercury that accumulates in body tissues causes a variety of health
problems. The study cited in the first paragraph of Passage 1 found a
correlation between mercury amalgam fillings and a number of health
conditions. A correlation does not prove causation, but the author of
Passage 1 states that “this accumulated mercury causes a variety of health
problems.”
Interpreting Fiction

Lesson 1: Plot Elements
Practice 1, page 101
1. B. swearing that he was telling the truth The following statement in the
excerpt gives the context and meaning: “It is nevertheless God’s own
truth, the sacred truth. I repeat it on my soul and my salvation.”
2. D. confronted him and then asked to be searched According to the
excerpt, when the harness-maker comes in and repeats his story, the two
“abused each other for an hour. At his own request, Maître Hauchecorne
was searched.”

3. C. A peasant is accused of taking a pocketbook. As you read the
excerpt, you understand that a harness-maker has accused a peasant of
taking a pocketbook, and the mayor of the town believes the harnessmaker.
4. The elements go in this order:
3

The peasant and the harness-maker
argue.

2

The peasant explains that he picked
up a piece of string, not a
pocketbook.

4

The mayor issues a warning to the
peasant.

1

The mayor states that the harnessmaker witnessed the peasant stealing
the pocketbook.

Lesson 2: Inferences
Practice 2, page 103
1. A. had always loved her In the first paragraph, Louise recalls her
husband’s face: “the face that had never looked save with love upon her.”
The term save means “except.”
2. C. spread her arms out in welcome The first paragraph explains that
although Louise knew she would cry at the sight of her dead husband,
“that bitter moment” would soon give way to years of freedom, which she
welcomed.
3. A. she was overcome and thrilled to see her husband The doctors
assumed that Louise was so glad to learn her husband had not died in an
accident that she was shocked and overjoyed to see him walk in the door.
4. B. She was shocked that she would not be free. Much of the excerpt is
about Louise looking forward to the freedom of being without her
husband. When she learns that her husband is alive, she also learns that

she will not be free.

Lesson 3: Character
Practice 3, page 105
1. B. He is reluctant to see the ghost of his wife. The witch, supposedly
speaking as Yaji’s wife, says that she lies in her grave longing for Yaji to
die and join her. She then asks, “Shall I come to meet you?” Throughout
the passage, Yaji seems uncomfortable. At this moment you can infer that
he is reluctant.
2. C. untrustworthy The witch is tricking Yaji. The witch has her own
interests at heart when she pretends it is the wife requesting, “Give this
witch plenty of money.”
3. D. neglectful The information we are given about Yaji suggests that he
treated his wife poorly when she was alive and now does not tend her
grave.

Lesson 4: Theme
Practice 4, page 107
1. B. finds a new explanation After his father tells the boy he is dreaming,
the boy states, “I decided that it was a magic horse and man that I’d seen.”
2. B. imaginative The detailed description of the dream and the boy’s
insistence on believing in it are signs of his imaginative powers.
3. A. He wants to reconcile what he saw with what his father told him.
Initially the boy seems to think that he saw a real, ordinary horse, but his
father explains why this is unlikely. However, the boy does not accept the
explanation that he was merely dreaming. Thus, he thinks of a new
explanation.
4. B. having enough money to pay some bills The father is a practical man,
a realist—“where were poor people like us going to find big gray
stallions?” Because of the family’s poverty, the father would probably
enjoy having money to pay bills.
5. D. Morning and youth are full of possibility. The end of the excerpt
states, “I believed that magic hides in the early morning. . . . You might

find something so beautiful . . . nothing else in life could ever be better.”

Lesson 5: Style and Point of View
Practice 5, page 109
1. B. He takes things in stride. When Coach chides Bobby for having three
malts, Bobby jokes with him and then pretends to hide them. Bobby is not
angry or defensive in a way that could justify choice (D).
2. C. the actions and speech of the characters The narrator reports only
what can be seen or heard by any observer. As a reader, you don’t learn
anyone’s thoughts or feelings. You must infer them from their actions and
speech.
3. A. informal Throughout the excerpt, people speak and act quite
informally: Daphne washes up in a drinking fountain, Coach speaks with a
spoon in his mouth, Bobby jokes with Coach, and so on.
4. D. not entirely honest about his feelings In his discussion with Daphne,
Coach tries to explain his wife’s need for an apartment of her own. Yet he
sounds hostile and cuts his wife off when she speaks of her apartment.
You can conclude he was hiding his real feelings from Daphne.

Lesson 6: Figurative Language
Practice 6, page 111
1. B. rain clouds approaching Stanza 2 states, “patch of cloud spreads,
darkening/Like a water-stain on silk.” The following line mentions the
coming rain: “. . . quickly, before the rain!”
2. C. The rain caused their makeup to run. The previous two lines mention
“soaked by the shower” and “drenched.” Immediately preceding the
mention of “ruined faces” is a description of “streaked” mascara. The
girls’ makeup is streaked because of the rain.
3. B. the wind is so strong that it is blowing spray from the river into the
boat The figurative language helps you “see” the effects of the strong
wind by painting a picture of curtains embroidered with white foamy
water blown from the river.
4. A. quick and easy A knife cuts through a melon quickly and easily, and

that is how cold, wet autumn weather has cut through the warm summer
day.
5. C. wry and observant Throughout the poem, the speaker observes and
comments on what is going on around him with a dryly humorous, or wry,
attitude.

Interpreting Fiction Practice Questions, Pages 112–115
1. C. self-concerned Leroy’s condition inspires Norma Jean to care for
herself. She discusses herself and her body, and the passage gives no
indication that any of the other answers fit her character.
2. C. won’t be driving his truck for a while The passage tells us Leroy is
injured and probably won’t drive, so describing the truck as roosting, or
sleeping, implies it will not be used.
3. D. doesn’t want to consider what to do next The passage says that Leroy
is “not sure what to do next” and is making his crafts “in the meantime.”
4. A. It took some courage. The fourth paragraph says the boy’s “heart
[was] in his mouth” and the sixth paragraph explains the boy was “scared
as he looked down.”
5. B. alone The boy has come to believe that you cannot rely on anyone but
yourself. He is alone on the deck and sees the bird alone atop the mast.
Even though it needs help, he is not going to help it at first.
6. D. loneliness and sense of belonging The sailor-boy begins the excerpt
believing that everyone must look after himself. The final sentence of the
excerpt states that his adventure leaves him with the belief that “the sky,
the ship, the bird and himself were all one.”
7. D. triumphant The mood of the piece rises as the boy climbs the mast to
save the bird. At the top, he feels proud of what he has chosen to do and
succeeded at doing and feels at one with everything.
8. C. start singing again A clue is given in the phrase “but his parched
tongue clove to the roof of his mouth, and he could not utter a stave.” His
mouth, dry from fear, could not utter a note of the song.
9. A. panic Reading those words both alone and in context gives you a sense
of Ichabod’s panic-stricken haste to get away.

10. C. suspenseful There is mystery and tension over whether the headless
horseman will catch up with Ichabod and, if so, what he will do. The
events that are happening and the way they are told create suspense.
11. B. too scared to think rationally When you realize that Ichabod
mistakenly thought he saw a head when it was in reality a pumpkin, you
can see that he was letting his fear get the better of his judgment.
12. B. reading Reading had always been a “gentle thing” to Henry. He is not
pleased with the students he has taught and not interested in the politics
and history they bring to interpretations of literature.
13. C. a dime a dozen Henry thinks of the younger students as “massproduced” undergraduates. In other words, they are all the same.
14. A. dissect literature too much and ruin the meaning Henry views
reading as delicate, the meaning comes “whole, unbroken.” This is in
contrast to the older students, who overanalyze everything they read
(“carve and quarter”) and apply their own modern interpretations to it
(“stuffed with their political-sexual agendas”).
15. C. disapproving Henry is critical and dissatisfied with college students.
16. D. disapproving Henry is displeased with college students and with
college offerings such as the humanities courses taught by his brother.
You can conclude that in general he disapproves of the state of college
education.
Writing Effective Sentences

Lesson 1: Simple Sentences
Practice 1, page 117
A. The revisions are samples. Your rewrites may differ.
1. F It drives his girlfriend crazy.
2. F As soon as he comes home from work, he starts talking on the
telephone.
3. C
4. F Dave’s sister and his best friend like to talk on the telephone, too.

B. 5. C. call from Choice (C) correctly forms a complete sentence and
avoids creating a sentence fragment, as choices (A) and (B) do. “A
conference calling” in Choice (D) is badly worded.
6. C. if you’re closing a deal, you can bring your lawyer into the
conversation Choice (C) includes a subject, thus creating a complete
sentence. Choice (D) includes an incorrect verb form in might could.
7. C. service can Choice (C) uses the correct verb and avoids making a
sentence fragment (as choice (D) does).

Lesson 2: Compound and Complex Sentences
Practice 2.1, page 119
A. 1. It was late, and I was walking home from work.
2. My coworker, Judy, had offered to drive me, but I had refused.
3. It was a warm night, so I decided to get some fresh air.
4. It was really my choice. I could have taken a cab, or I could have
walked.
5. I heard a loud noise, so I ran the last block to my house. Later, I
learned that it was only a car backfiring.
B. 6. B. An air courier carries shipping documents on an international
flight and A comma is required when two independent clauses are
joined but not when two verbs are joined (carries . . . gets). All the
incorrect choices have unnecessary commas.
7. A. airlines, but But is the most logical coordinating conjunction here.
Most travelers on major airlines can check baggage. Because there are
two clauses (couriers . . . fly . . . they can’t check), a comma is needed.
8. B. in advance, but they get their tickets on the day of the flight A
comma precedes a coordinating conjunction joining two independent
clauses.
Practice 2.2, page 121
A. 1. Most fatal fires occur when a family is asleep.
2. Because a smoke alarm wakes you up, it can allow you to escape.
3. Try to replace the smoke detector’s battery before it goes dead.
4. Although smoke detectors cost money, the expense is worth it.

B. 5. B. are making a business call, The subordinate clause should be
followed by a comma. Choice (C) is incorrect because the present tense
is needed for a statement that is generally true.
6. A. After you identify yourself, ask The introductory phrase should be
followed by a comma. Choice (B) is incorrect because the word
Whenever is not appropriate here.
7. D. up, thank Choice (D) correctly combines an introductory phrase
and an independent clause to form a complex sentence.

Lesson 3: Run-Ons and Comma Splices
Practice 3, page 123
A. There are several possible correct answers. There may be other correct
answers in addition to those listed.
1. Jeff just got his driver’s license, and he’s very excited. OR Jeff just got
his driver’s license. He’s very excited.
2. He bought a car that has a lot of miles on it, so it wasn’t very
expensive. OR Because he bought a car that has a lot of miles on it, it
wasn’t very expensive.
3. He doesn’t have a lot of free time, but he’d like to take a car trip. OR
Although he doesn’t have a lot of free time, he’d like to take a car trip.
4. He needs to find out about car insurance, get a good map, and join an
auto club.
B. 5. A. pictures if you just Choice (A) correctly forms a complex sentence
by adding a subordinating conjunction.
6. B. Be patient and wait Choice (B) correctly uses a coordinating
conjunction. Don’t be misled by the apparent lack of a subject; both
clauses are commands, meaning the subject, you, is implied but
unstated.
7. C. the autofocus option because most cameras Choice (C) correctly
forms a compound sentence with a subordinating conjunction and a
comma.

Lesson 4: Subordinate Ideas
Practice 4, page 125

A. There are several possible answers for each question. Sample answers:
1. Tornadoes and earthquakes can cause a lot of damage.
2. Earthquakes are somewhat common in California, but many
Californians do not seem to mind.
3. On May 20, 2013, a tornado in Oklahoma killed twenty-four people
and injured almost 400.
4. Tornadoes can occur anywhere in the United States and at any time of
year.
B. 5. D. repaired up Choice (D) avoids forming two short, choppy clauses
and instead forms one smooth sentence. The other choices are run-ons,
excessively wordy, or both.
6. A. may be brought or mailed to the service center Choice (A) forms
a compound predicate and avoids expressing ideas in short, choppy
sentences.
7. D. due to accidents, mishandling, or Choice (D) makes one smooth,
detailed sentence by forming a compound predicate.

Lesson 5: Modify Ideas
Practice 5, page 127
A. There are several possible answers for each question. Sample answers:
1. Trent’s sister, who is a health professional, encouraged him to become
a nurse.
2. When he wakes up the patients to take their blood pressure, they get
rather annoyed.
3. He carefully writes their temperature and blood pressure on their
charts.
4. It is hard to make visitors who are talking with the patients leave at
9:00 p.m.
B. 5. B. a person who is not the birth child of the adopter the rights of a
son or daughter Only choice (C) displays correct modifier placement.
6. C. An agency requires a “home study” to determine All the wrong
answer choices include misplaced modifiers.
7. D. frequently handle these adoptions when parents ask them to
Choice (D) is the only answer choice that correctly places the modifier

“frequently.”

Lesson 6: Parallel Structure
Practice 6, page 129
A. There are several possible answers for each question. Sample answers:
1. Jenna has worked in a factory, a store, and a restaurant.
2. She would like to put her kids in a better school and to get a better job.
3. She thinks the kids’ father is irresponsible, lazy, and uncaring.
4. He doesn’t have the time, the energy, or the money to give them what
they deserve.
B. 5. C. safer, more comfortable, and more pleasant Choice (C) correctly
makes all the adjectives into comparatives (safer, more comfortable,
and more pleasant).
6. D. computers, and Choice (D) correctly forms a list in which all items
display parallel construction.
7. C. the secret code, press ON, and leave immediately Only choice
(C) makes all the verbs in the sentence (punch, press, and leave)
parallel.
Writing Effective Sentences Practice Questions, pages 130–133
1. B. Seal your windows so that cold air can’t get through When an
independent clause comes before a subordinate clause in a complex
sentence, there is no need to use a comma.
2. B. during the day and 62° at night Choice (B) is the most concise.
3. D. sun, keep Choice (D) is the only choice that correctly links the
subordinate clause at the beginning of the sentence with the independent
clause that starts with “keep.”
4. D. home. Do change Choice (D) avoids making a comma splice
or a run-on. It also is consistent with the theme of the paragraph as being a
list of recommendations.
5. A. will not cool down any faster when your air conditioner is on full
blast Only choice (A) correctly places the modifying phrase any faster.

6. B. When I got the television home, I discovered In this sentence, When
begins a subordinate clause. A comma should be placed after a
subordinate clause that begins a complex sentence.
7. A. I returned to the store to see if the problem could Only choice (A)
correctly adds the subject “I” and uses the proper verb tenses.
8. A. He claimed that because the TV had been used, Only choice (A)
correctly adds a subject, He, to make it clear who was claiming that the
TV had been used.
9. A. angry and frustrated about the treatment I received Choice (A)
makes a smooth complex predicate instead of a choppy run-on sentence, a
run-on, or a comma splice.
10. C. refund or get Choice (C) puts both verbs in the same form. Choice (A)
is grammatically correct but illogically suggests that Jeffrey will return
and repair the TV.
11. A. work productively if you feel alone This choice correctly places
productively close to the word it modifies (work) and avoids lengthy or
wordy constructions.
12. C. can make your day more pleasant and give you energy A comma is
not required before a coordinating conjunction that joins two verbs.
13. B. Things get messy when the friendship unravels A comma is not
required in a complex sentence when the subordinate clause follows the
independent clause. The verb form get is more appropriate than are
getting, because the sentence does not refer to something that is
necessarily happening right now.
14. A. work or talk Both verbs in the sentence should be in the same form.
There is no need for a comma when a coordinating conjunction joins two
verbs.
15. B. may be hard, but it’s worth the effort A comma is required before
the coordinating conjunction that joins the two independent clauses in a
compound sentence.
16. D. hoaxes designed Choice (D) efficiently turns the second part of the
sentence into a descriptive phrase while avoiding wordiness.

17. B. check a claim like this by contacting the agency Choice (B)
efficiently turns the second part of the sentence into a modifying phrase
while avoiding wordiness.
18. C. know. This Choice (C) expresses the ideas as two independent clauses.
Choice (A) is missing the comma required when joining two independent
clauses with a conjunction.
19. D. keep your computer equipment safe and avoid spreading hysteria
Choice (D) joins the two ideas in a compound predicate. A comma is not
needed in a compound predicate.
Connecting Ideas

Lesson 1: Organize Ideas into Paragraphs
Practice 1.1, page 135

A. 1. The pharmacist at the local drugstore is very helpful.
2. No MI
3. Every vote counts, so let your voice be heard and vote!
4. When you are traveling, it’s a good idea to mark your luggage clearly.
5. Listening to music can benefit you in many ways.
B. 6. C. sentence 4 Sentences 1–3 explain who gets colds and how
frequently. Sentences 4–6 are about the causes and prevention of colds.
7. D. join paragraphs B and C Sentence 10 in paragraph C is related to
the main idea of paragraph B, the prevention of colds.
Practice 1.2, page 137
A. Your topic sentences should be similar to these:
1. Satellites have many different functions in today’s world.
2. All signs show that the economy is headed for a slump.
3. The library has adopted a new dress code for employees.
B. 4. D. Repetitive strain injury is a painful condition resulting from
repeated use of the hands. The original topic sentence is too general.
The other options don’t tell the central point: what repetitive strain
injury is.

5. B. A number of factors contribute to repetitive strain injury. This
sentence covers the three causes of repetitive strain injury mentioned in
the paragraph.

Lesson 2: Use Logical Order and Relevant Ideas
Practice 2, page 139
A. 1. Irrelevant detail: Getting very ill is one bad thing that could happen.
2. Irrelevant detail: Adult students can also use school supplies.
3. Irrelevant detail: This job will be extremely expensive!
B. 4. D. remove sentence 3 This sentence adds no new information to what
was given in the previous sentences.
5. D. remove sentence 6 The information about the secretarial job is not
relevant to getting a job in carpentry.
6. D. move sentence 10 to follow sentence 8 It would be more logical to
place sentence 9 at the end of the letter.

Lesson 3: Relate Sentences and Paragraphs
Practice 3, page 141
A. Your transitions should be similar to these:
1. Our marketing efforts need to be enhanced. Therefore, we will soon
begin another marketing initiative.
2. Sales representatives say
their jobs are extremely demanding. However, the salary is attractive.
3. The marketing director has instructed sales representatives to try some
new ideas. For example, sales representatives can give away free
samples.
4. A new ad campaign will be launched in just a few weeks. As a result,
we expect sales to increase.
B. 5. B. Times are changing, however, and these days patrons can even
buy coffee This position is the most logical for the transition. Also,
because it is in the middle of a sentence, it should be set off by
commas.
6. B. restaurant. For example, The second sentence offers an example

of the broad menu described in the first sentence.
7. A. In addition, having a café This option inserts a helpful transition to
move the reader smoothly from paragraph B to paragraph C.

Connecting Ideas Practice Questions, page 142–145
1. C. sentence 5 Sentences 1–4 are about the general problem of sleep
disruption, whereas sentences 5–8 are about reasons why people don’t get
enough sleep.
2. B. High-achieving students get more sleep. Both studies relate to the
impact of lack of sleep on learning.
3. A. grades. Similarly, The ideas on either side of the “Select” button are
similar, so they can be connected this way.
4. D. remove sentence 12 The paragraph is about sleep, not losing weight.
5. D. join paragraphs C and D Both paragraphs contain tips for getting
more sleep.
6. B. sentence 4 Sentences 1–3 introduce the purpose of the passage.
Sentences 4–7 contain general rules for stain removal.
7. B. Choose the right water temperature for cleaning each stain. This
sentence is appropriate since the paragraph discusses hot, cold, and roomtemperature water.
8. D. juice, for example, removes When a transition is placed in the middle
of a sentence, commas should both precede and follow it.
9. D. remove sentence 15 Sentence 15 explains a minor detail and moves
away from the main idea of the paragraph.
10. C. move sentence 19 to the beginning of paragraph D Putting sentence
19 at the beginning of the paragraph lets readers know in advance what
point the paragraph will make.
11. C. remove sentence 5 Sentence 5 is a general statement about HMOs. It is
not relevant to the explanation of which insurance carriers are being made
available.
12. A. However, you must pay the health providers when A comma should
follow when a transition begins a sentence.

13. C. sentence 9 Until sentence 9, paragraph B is about the differences
between the two insurance plans. Sentence 9 introduces the idea of the
informational sessions.
14. A. move sentence 14 to the end of paragraph C Sentence 14 refers to
the card that was mentioned in paragraph C and so continues that idea.
15. A. move sentence 2 to follow sentence 3 The description of removing the
wheel should start with the initial step.
16. C. move sentence 11 to follow sentence 12 Sentence 11 tells what to do
with the spot where there is a leak, so it should follow the information on
finding that spot.
17. C. The next step is to put the tire and tube back onto the rim.
Paragraph C describes the process of putting the tire and tube back on the
rim.
18. A. The final step is to reinstall the wheel. Paragraph D describes the
final step in the process; putting the wheel back on the bike.
19. A. Then readjust the tire pressure, and you’re Of the choices given,
then is the most appropriate transition for describing steps in a process.
Writing About Text

Lesson 1: Unpack the Writing Prompt
Practice 1, page 147
1. The topic of the writing prompt is a pair of passages that discuss the
safety of cell phones.
2.The writing prompt asks me: Do I agree with the writer of Passage A or
the writer of Passage B, and what information led me to that decision?
3. I am asked to include specific information from both selections to
support my response.
4. I am being asked for my position on the topic.

Lesson 2: Identify a Writer’s Arguments and Assumptions

Practice 2, page 149
Your answers should be similar to this, but your wording may vary.
1. Mandatory military service
2. We should promote participation in volunteer programs rather than require
mandatory military service.
3. There are a couple of assumptions you might have identified. One is the
potential drawback of mandatory military service (that is, the resentment it
might generate) outweighs its potential benefit (preparing the U.S. military
to face foreign threats). Another is it would be better to heavily promote
volunteer programs than to leave things the way they are now.
4. Violence in video games
5. People should protest violent video games to protect children from
portrayals of excessive violence.
6. There are a couple of assumptions you might have identified. First: the
studies mentioned in the first paragraph, which indicated a correlation
between violent video games and violent behavior, actually indicate a
causal relationship. Second: the strategies effective in 1976 will still be
effective today.

Lesson 3: Develop a Thesis Statement
Practice 3, page 151
These answers are samples; your answers may vary.
1. Prescription drug advertising on TV is harmful because it can lead patients
to request or refuse medication for reasons that are not medically sound.
2. The author’s argument against direct-to-consumer advertisement of
prescription medication is unconvincing because it does not provide any
statistical data about how drug advertisements have actually affected
consumer behavior.
Alternatively, you might have written something like this:
The author’s argument against direct-to-consumer advertisement of
prescription
medication is convincing because the author provides several potential
dangers of the practice.

3. Because 18% of the U.S. population speaks a native language other than
English, and because industries such as technology and business require
contact with people who speak other languages, Americans should put a
higher priority on learning foreign languages.
4. The author’s argument in favor of foreign language education is
compelling because she points out the large proportion of people living in
the United States who speak foreign languages, as well as the many
contexts where a native English speaker would come in contact with that
18%.
Alternatively, you might have written something like this:
The author’s argument in favor of foreign language education is not
compelling because she does not explain the drawbacks of alternatives to
foreign language education, such as enhanced English language education
for those whose primary language is not English.

Lesson 4: Collect Supporting Evidence
Practice 4, page 153
These answers are samples; your answers may vary.
1. The passage states that alcohol is particularly harmful to parts of the brain
that grow later in life.
Another fact from the passage is that alcohol causes long-term damage to
the heart and liver.
In support of this position, the text further says that the United Kingdom
allows younger individuals to drink and also has high rates of alcoholrelated death.
2. Choose either agree or disagree.
3. You might have written something like this:
(Agree) One piece of personal evidence I would use to support my
position is that teenagers are already at higher risk of accidents when
driving, and alcohol would only exacerbate this fact.
(Disagree) One piece of personal evidence I would use to support my
position is that 18-year-olds can enter combat in the military and can vote
for the president. Claiming they are not responsible enough for alcohol is
inconsistent with the responsibilities and privileges we otherwise give 18-

year-olds.

Lesson 5: Plan Your Response
Practice 5, page 156–157
The following is a sample response. There is no objectively correct answer to
the writing prompt. You may write your essay either for or against the
author’s position. Thus, answers to the following questions may vary.
1. Sample thesis statement: I think that the writer’s position on owning a
family pet is correct because the inconvenience and expenses cited
outweigh the benefits, and because as someone allergic to cats, I agree
with the writer’s point that having pets can make it difficult for friends
who visit.
2. Sample outline:
I. The writer is correct that pets have more downsides than benefits and
that families should not have pets.
II. Monetary expenses; food, pet sitters, veterinary care, cleaning.
III. Chores and time involved; kids may promise to help, but likely would
not.
IV. Friends can’t visit; allergies, difficult with overnight guests.
V. Pets are good friends and can be calming influence when people are
stressed.
A. Some people think this justifies any expense and difficulty in
keeping animals.
i. But, pets can keep away real friends and introduce stress as well,
countering benefits.
ii. Instead of petting a cat to relieve stress over money, it would be
better to save the money you would spend on the cat’s food and
vet bills.
3. Sample idea map:
The idea map below demonstrates how you might organize your thoughts
to argue for pet ownership. Your idea map may vary.

Lesson 6: Draft Your Response
Practice 6.1, page 159
Your answers may vary.
A. Sample topic sentences:
Pet ownership is a major burden, and the time and money people invest in
pets could be better spent elsewhere. The author of the passage says that
keeping a pet is not worth the trouble, but he fails to consider all of the many
benefits of pet ownership.
Your supporting statements may vary quite a bit, so no samples are given
here. Check to make sure that your supporting statements are relevant to your
topic statement.
B. Sample concluding statements:
And so, when all is taken into consideration, the conclusion is clear: the cost
of a pet far outweighs the benefit.

Don’t let the long list of difficulties listed by the author scare you away,
because a pet can be a friend to you and your children, one whose value can’t
be measured against time and money.
Practice 6.2, pages 160–161
Refer to the Reasoning throughLanguage Arts Extended Response Evaluation
Guide on page 730 to evaluate your response.
Practice 6.3, pages 162–163
Refer to the Reasoning through Language Arts Extended Response
Evaluation Guide on page 730 to evaluate your response.

Lesson 7: Revise and Edit Your Response
Practice 7.1, page 165
A. Sample revision:
Most of us are aware that speeding has consequences, which range from
receiving a speeding ticket to getting into an accident. Nonetheless, a quick
survey of any highway will show that many drivers exceed the speed limit.
This raises the question: why do people speed?
¶ One common reason is that people do not think they will suffer any
consequences. If they have never been stopped by the police or crashed their
car, been involved in a car crash, they don’t see any reason to worry.
Another reason is that people simply need to get somewhere in a hurry.
They realize that they are speeding, but they have such a need to arrive on
time that they don’t care their impatience gets the better of them. They’ve got
ants in their pants.
¶ A final reason is lack of respect for other drivers, one. One driver who is
speeding makes road conditions less safe for everyone. Drivers who act as
though they are in the Indy 500 they have no regard for the safety of others.
We know that people speed because of impatience and they don’t fear the
consequences. they’re impatient and don’t fear the consequences. Another
reason is no respect. They also don’t respect other drivers. Let’s figure out
what will make them stop speeding.
B. Sample response:
Refer to the Reasoning through Language Arts Extended Response

Evaluation Guide on page 730 to evaluate your response.
Practice 7.2, page 167
Your revised paragraphs should be similar to the following.
One common reason for speeding is that people don’t think they will suffer
consequences. If they have never been stopped by the police or been involved
in a car crash, they’ve never experienced the dangers of speeding first-hand.
Another reason is that people simply need to get somewhere in a hurry.
They realize that they are speeding, but their impatience gets the better of
them.
A final reason is lack of respect for other drivers. One driver who is
speeding makes road conditions less safe for everyone. Drivers who act as
though they are in a race have no regard for the safety of other drivers.
Writing About Text Practice, pages 168–171
A. Refer to the Reasoning through Language Arts Extended Response
Evaluation Guide on page 730 to evaluate your response.
B. Refer to the Reasoning through Language Arts Extended Response
Evaluation Guide on page 730 to evaluate your response.
Polishing Your Writing

Lesson 1: Strengthen Sentences
Practice 1, page 173
A. Your revised sentences should be similar to the following. The underlined
parts show where your revision marks should be:
1. First, write down what you know about your family. Then interview
relatives. (Run-on sentence)
2. Videotaping or recording the interviews is a good idea. (Structure not
parallel)
3. Ask relatives to provide exact names, dates, and other details.
(Structure not parallel)
4. Make copies of documents such as birth certificates and marriage
licenses. (Sentence fragment)

5. When older family members are interviewed, they’ll often tell you
stories you never heard. (Dangling modifier)
6. Carefully record all the information you get and put it in a three-ring
binder. (Misplaced modifier)
7. Some people use their computers to do genealogy searches, and they
get very good results. (Comma splice; coordinating conjunction
needed)
8. However, one must have the time, the patience, and the know-how to
use the Internet. (Structure not parallel)
9. If you do decide to learn more about your roots, don’t be surprised to
find yourself at a huge family reunion. (Comma needed after
subordinate clause)
10. The whole process of putting together a family tree and contacting longlost family members is rewarding. (Sentence fragment)
B. Sample revisions:
It was a beautiful day, and the blue ocean sparkled in the sunlight. It was a
perfect day for going to the beach. As Renelle looked across the sand, she
saw two little girls building a sandcastle and making a moat next to it.
Renelle spread out her towel, anchored it with her shoes and beach bag, and
began to read a magazine. Suddenly, she heard a voice say, ”Are you going to
get in the water, or are you just going to lie there?” Renelle looked up and
saw her friend Terry. She laughed softly and got up to greet Terry. Putting on
her sandals, she walked with Terry across the burning sand to the water’s
edge.
Renelle loved going to the beach. It relaxed her and helped her forget
about her problems. It didn’t cost money like most other forms of
entertainment. Most of Renelle’s friends also spent a lot of time at the beach,
so that was another incentive.

Lesson 2: Improve Organization
Practice 2, page 175
A. Your revised paragraphs should be similar to the following (starting after
the first revision made for you):
Why do people continue to litter? One reason people litter is that they
just don’t care about others. It doesn’t bother them to leave their trash in

front of someone else’s apartment building, forcing another person to deal
with the problem. This inconsiderate attitude is also reflected in the refusal
to recycle plastic, glass, and newspapers. People figure that they won’t be
around in the future when the landfills are used up, so who cares?
¶ Another possible reason for littering is low self-esteem. If people
don’t feel good about themselves, they won’t be motivated to keep their
environment looking attractive. Low self-esteem can cause many other
problems, including depression and lack of self-confidence. People who
have high self-esteem believe that it’s important to keep their home, the
planet Earth, clean and beautiful.
B. Ask a friend or family member to evaluate your work.

Lesson 3: Word Choice
Practice 3, page 177
Sample answers:
A. 1. nonprofit organization
2. thousands of
3. substandard
4. dollars
5. as soon as possible
B. If you ever order merchandise from a catalog, you should be aware of your
rights. All companies, regardless of the state in which they are located, are
required to ship your order within 30 days unless they have advertised a
different shipping time. If a company is unable to meet the shipping
deadline, it must send you an “Option Notice.” You can choose to wait
longer or get a refund.
Some consumers have complained about receiving merchandise that
they did not order. Companies that engage in this practice are breaking the
law. If you receive a product you haven’t ordered, it is yours to keep.
If you receive a package that has been damaged, don’t open it. Write
“REFUSED” on the package, and return it to the seller. There’s no need to
add new postage as long as the package came by regular mail.
C. Have a friend or family member evaluate your work.

Polishing Your Writing Practice Questions, pages 178–181
1. C. gardener, it’s important that Sentence 2 is a subordinate clause, not a
complete sentence. Use a comma to combine it with the independent
clause in sentence 3, creating a complex sentence.
2. A. option if you live in a climate that is too extreme The phrase not good
is vague, since it provides no information about how a climate might be
unsuitable. Too extreme allows the reader to anticipate the temperature
and moisture requirements discussed in paragraph D.
3. B. move sentence 8 to follow sentence 9 Sentence 9 is the topic sentence
—it gives the main idea—for paragraph C. As such, it should be the first
sentence of the paragraph.
4. D. move sentence 11 to the beginning of paragraph D The topic of
paragraph C is choosing a garden spot, whereas the topic of paragraph D is
choosing plants. Therefore, sentence 11, which is about choosing plants,
should appear in paragraph D.
5. C. plants to Choice (C) best expresses the relationship between the idea of
investigating plants and the reason for doing so. These clauses should
instead be joined with a word or phrase that expresses the relationship
between them.
6. A. Wales and had come to The phrase which had come in the incorrect
answer choices implies that Wales had come to the United States, not the
boy. Replace which with and to clarify.
7. D. ocean; it A semicolon is required to separate two independent clauses,
correcting the run-on sentence.
8. C. Could he have crossed the vast Describing the ocean as vast conveys
the sense of size more precisely than does the phrase really big.
9. B. joking All of the wrong choices employ slang, which should be
avoided.
10. C. Sentence 12 Sentence 12 does not relate directly to the story of the
narrator’s great-grandfather’s journey from Wales to the United States.
Therefore it is unnecessary and should be removed.
11. D. and morality. She also frequently Only choice (D) avoids a run-on

sentence.
12. B. Many consider this All of the incorrect answer choices are
unnecessarily wordy. Additionally, choice (A) uses the informal phrase
figure, which should not be used to express the idea of thinking.
13. C. Combine the two sentences by replacing the period with a comma.
As written, the second sentence is not a sentence at all. It should serve as
an appositive describing lupus in the previous sentence.
14. A. Flannery maintained many fulfilling correspondences that gave her
the insight into human behavior that is evident in her writing This
construction best avoids wordiness.
15. A. will ensure you continue The adverb always is unnecessary when
paired with the verb continue.
16. B. Then we will replace The adverbs then and next are redundant when
used together.
17. C. times. You Insert a period and remove and between the two
independent clauses.
18. D. However, we will adjust your bill accordingly if your service is
interrupted. Unless However is followed by a comma, it seems that it is
being used to modify the adjustment. Insert a comma to clarify that
However introduces the sentence.
19. B. about the scheduled repairs, please contact our office Choices (A)
and (D) create sentence fragments, and choice (C) is missing the comma
that must follow an introductory phrase.
Using Grammar Correctly

Lesson 1: Noun and Pronoun Agreement
Practice 1.1, page 183
A. 1. They
2. him
3. it
4. Her

5. she
B. 6. D. Bonetta and I Bonetta and I is a compound subject, so a subject
pronoun is required.
7. D. She always gets The simple present tense and the subject form of
the pronoun are appropriate here.
8. B. Walter or me The phrase Walter or me is an object, so an object
pronoun is required.
Practice 1.2, page 185
A. 1. Sally is moving to a small town. Her mother is concerned about the
health care options it offers.
2. Sally tried to reassure her mother, but it was hard for her mother to
believe her.
3. Sally asked a friend who lives in the town for information about its
health care facilities. OR the town’s health care facilities.
4. The town has a freestanding clinic where people can go when they are
sick.
5. There is also a nearby hospital, and it has a very good reputation.
6. If one is concerned about health care, one should sign up for a good
insurance plan. OR If you are concerned about health care, you should
sign up for a good insurance plan.
B. 7. D. will learn only that they shouldn’t make their The word children
earlier in the sentence is the antecedent to the pronoun; their agrees
correctly with that antecedent, while the singular one's does not.
8. D. parents Only choice (D) correctly identifies who should be clear
about their expectations.
9. C. the child to play with the group The term play group is a
collective noun, so the plural them should not be used to refer to it. In
this case, repeating the word group is the best way to make the
meaning clear.

Lesson 2: Verb Forms and Tenses
Practice 2.1, page 187
A. 1. had ceased

2. closed
3. functions
4. have visited
5. will open
6. looks
7. are thinking
B. 8. B. is offering The action is taking place right now, so the present
progressive is the correct tense.
9. D. If you sign up for Express Lane before April 9 The present-tense
verb sign in the subordinate clause is appropriate, given the futuretense verb will receive in the main clause.
10. D. will amaze you The verb will amaze is in the simple future tense.
The future progressive tense in will be amazing you is incorrect and
overcomplicated.
Practice 2.2, page 189
A. 1. came
2. showed
3. had spoken
4. took
5. seen
B. 6. D. began to appear on The action takes place in the past tense, so the
verb should be in its past form, began.
7. C. was broken Broken is the correct past participle.
8. B. now give viewers The clue word now tells you that the action is still
true, so the present-tense form of give is correct.

Lesson 3: Subject-Verb Agreement
Practice 3.1, page 191
A. 1. is
2. become
3. is
4. have

5. seems
6. is
B. 7. B. have heard In this sentence, the indefinite pronoun most is plural
(“most of us”). The verb have heard agrees with the plural subject.
8. C. That noise occurs when a plane starts to The verb starts agrees
with the singular subject plane.
9. B. some other materials conduct sound The verb conduct agrees with
the plural subject materials.
Practice 3.2, page 193
A. 1. on the market carry
2. carrying the seal are
3. an important ingredient in many toothpastes strengthens, attacks
4. are
5. offer
6. with fluoride and good flavor is
B. 7. C. administers its own program and has The verb has agrees with
the singular subject state.
8. A. Wage level and the length of employment determine The verb
determine agrees with the compound subject Wage level and the length
of employment. The present tense is consistent with the rest of the
passage.
9. C. draw benefits report regu-larly to their The verb report agrees
with the plural subject workers.
Using Grammar Correctly Practice Questions, pages 194–197
1. C. highly paid coaches, but it didn’t happen The past tense is required
because the second clause in the sentence is discussing what happened in
the past.
2. A. they The antecedent of the underlined pronoun is girls, so it should be
plural. They is clear; repeating the girls (as in Choice (B)) is unnecessary.
Choice (D), them, is incorrect because the pronoun is the subject of the
dependent clause while they practiced.
3. B. earned The past tense is correct here because the action happened in the

past over the course of a few years.
4. D. who live in Palm Beach Gardens, Florida, are best friends The verb
are agrees with the plural subject sisters.
5. D. there is no trace of sibling rivalry The main clause needs the present
tense verb is because the introductory subordinate clause has a presenttense verb, face.
6. B. people where they have received The present perfect is correct here
because the point is to find out about other people’s past experiences with
auto shops, not their predictions about them.
7. D. pick a shop just because it’s close Because this sentence is a
command, the simple present tense is necessary.
8. D. these often come with restrictions attached The verb come agrees
with the plural subject specials. Choice (C) is incorrect because the past
tense is not consistent with the rest of the passage.
9. D. what’s wrong, the repair job will The pronoun it in the incorrect
choices has no clear antecedent.
10. C. there are The verb are agrees with the plural subject limits. The
present tense is correct.
11. B. changes and their effect The antecedent changes is plural, so the
plural possessive their should be used.
12. C. send photocopies of your records Your is used in the rest of the
paragraph, so it is appropriate here.
13. D. our calculations, which are appended to this letter The word which
is the subject of a subordinate clause. It refers to the plural noun
calculations. Therefore, the verb are, not is, is required.
14. A. has increased The interrupting phrase of taxes does not change the fact
that the subject of the new independent clause is amount, which is
singular. The verb has increased therefore agrees with it.
15. B. will credit The future tense indicates an action that will take place at a
later time, which is appropriate in this sentence.
16. B. don’t The plural indefinite pronoun many is the subject of the sentence;

the verb don’t (don’t = do + not) agrees with it. Changing to the past tense,
choice (C), would be incorrect.
17. C. is that people with disabilities have feelings The verb have agrees
with the plural subject people.
18. B. him or her The pronouns are objects of the preposition with, so the
objective forms him and her are needed. The antecedent is a person, so the
plural them in choice (D) cannot be used.
19. B. such as a wheelchair, cane, or communication board, is the
person’s property The verb is agrees with the singular subject equipment,
and the interrupting phrase listing examples of assistive equipment is
properly punctuated.
20. B. it It is the proper pronoun to use to refer to a dog.
Using Writing Mechanics

Lesson 1: Comma Use
Practice 1.1, page 199
A. 1. Train travel is more pleasant than riding a bus, but it can be more
expensive.
2. When you’re on a train, you can stand up and stretch if you need to.
3. NC
4. Unlike buses, trains sometimes have seats that face each other.
5. Traveling through a scenic area, you may find that your train has a
double-decker car that offers a better view.
6. NC
B. 7. A. For starters, use cooking methods that require little or no oil or
butter, A comma is required after an introductory phrase.
8. A. dressing, and A comma should come before a coordinating
conjunction in a compound sentence.
9. D. low-fat version, and though not all of them may be pleasing The
words though not all of them may be pleasing to the palate form a
subordinate clause, and no commas are necessary in that clause.

Practice 1.2, page 201
A. 1. Kwanzaa is a week-long African American holiday that celebrates
culture, community, and family.
2. Kwanzaa, a wintertime holiday, is based on an ancient African harvest
celebration.
3. NC
4. Kwanzaa celebrations include rituals such as singing, dancing,
drumming, and poetry reading.
5. The family lights one candle every day for each of seven principles:
unity, self-determination, responsibility, cooperative economics,
purpose, creativity, and faith.
6. NC
B. 7. A. home accidents are responsible for more children’s injuries than
all childhood diseases combined The subject and verb of a sentence
should not be separated by a comma.
8. B. medicines, poisons, or fragile objects are stored Commas should
be placed between items in a series
9. C. children, those ten and up, You can mentally omit the phrase those
ten and up and still understand the meaning of older children.
Therefore, the appositive those ten and up should be set off by
commas.

Lesson 2: Capitalization
Practice 2, page 203
A. 1. Last spring, I broke my arm in a car accident.
2. My internist, Doctor Claudia McNally, referred me to Waterside.
3. The center’s director, Ilana Harris, assigned me a physical therapist
named Ellie Royce.
4. Ellie studied physical therapy in her native London and used British
methods of treatment that relieved my pain quite effectively.
5. She also did therapy with me in the pool at Rainbow Health Club.
6. I finished my treatments just before Labor Day, and I feel 100 percent
better, thanks to Ellie.
B. 7. B. only emperors and nobles were A title should be capitalized

only when it comes directly before a person’s name or is used in direct
address.
8. C. they were trained to hunt game and waterfowl in the mountains
of Japan A geographic feature is capitalized only when it is part of the
name of a specific place, like Rocky Mountains.
9. B. America by author Helen Keller Proper nouns should be
capitalized.

Lesson 3: Possessives and Contractions
Practice 3, page 205
A. 1. There’s
2. can’t, who’s, it’s
3. we’re
4. theirs
5. ours
B. 6. D. questions, we need your In this phrase, the pronoun is showing
ownership, so your is correct.
7. B. In addition to our chain of stores, we’re proud Were is a verb and
is incorrect in this sentence. Rather, an apostrophe should be inserted to
create the contraction we’re, the combined form of we are.
8. B. parties should send their resumes In this sentence, the pronoun is
possessive, so their is correct.

Lesson 4: Homonyms
Practice 4, page 207
A. 1. fourth
2. know
3. whole
4. week
5. affect
6. past
B. 7. C. have logged great achievements in the workforce, so why don’t
they receive fair pay A fare is what you pay to get on the subway; fair

means just. Choice (A) is incorrect because the correct word is great,
meaning large, rather than grate, meaning a metal frame. Choice (B)
uses the wrong verb number: the word women needs a plural verb,
have.
8. A. In principle, the age gap could account for the wage gap because
older women still work in jobs in which attitudes and conditions of
the past A principal is the head of a school; principle means a guiding
rule. Passed
in choice (C) and four in choice (D) are also incorrect homonyms.
9. A. The effect is that, as women get older, the gap between men’s
and women’s salaries becomes greater. Affect is a verb meaning to
influence; effect, which means result, is required here.
Using Writing Mechanics Practice Questions, pages 208–211
1. B. Instead, children may have tantrums, erase phone messages, The
phrase have tantrums is the first item in a series, so it should be followed
by a comma.
2. C. understand and show A comma should not be used between two
verbs, and avoiding the comma is simpler and cleaner than adding a new
subject as in incorrect choice (D).
3. D. your kids know that you feel you’re The first “your” is a possessive.
The second “you’re” is a contraction of “you are.”
4. C. your children aren’t at home The apostrophe in a contraction must be
placed in the spot where a letter has been removed.
5. B. down, consider An introductory subordinate clause should be followed
by a comma.
6. B. time is to save energy The subject (One) and its verb (is) should not be
separated by a comma.
7. B. its standard time by an hour The sentence is about ownership: each
time zone has its own standard time. The possessive form its is correct.
8. B. Congress passed a law making The name Congress refers to a specific
body of lawmakers and should therefore be capitalized.
9. A. For example, radio and TV stations had An introductory phrase must

be followed by a comma.
10. C. ending dates for daylight saving time in the spring and fall There is
no need to separate the final phrase from the rest of the sentence with a
comma.
11. C. for joining Spring Valley Community Center When a proper name
consists of more than one word, all the words should be capitalized.
12. D. Please have your membership card with you at all times when
you’re in the building. The sentence is saying, “when you are in the
building,” so the contraction you’re is needed.
13. A. If you are a weak swimmer, life jackets A week is seven days. Weak,
meaning not strong, is appropriate for this sentence.
14. D. children’s pool unless they’re supervised The clause beginning with
unless does not need to be set off with commas.
15. B. register and pay Two items joined by and do not require a comma
unless both are independent clauses.
16. C. than their white counterparts, often for The word needed in the
sentence is than, meaning compared with. Then means after that or at that
time.
17. C. from 23 states show that this policy, called racial profiling, The
phrase called racial profiling is an appositive but is not essential to
understanding the sentence. It needs a comma before and after it.
18. B. distinctions, for nonwhites The conjunction for is connecting two
independent clauses in a compound sentence, so it must be preceded by a
comma.
19. B. Illinois, yet 30 percent Names of states should be capitalized.
20. B. However, police superintendents, chiefs of police, and other law
enforcement officials Three items are listed in the series: police
superintendents, chiefs of police, and other law enforcement officials.
There should be commas separating them.

Mathematical Reasoning

Number Sense and Problem Solving

Lesson 1: Compare and Order Numbers
Practice 1, page 219
1. 4
2. 8
3. 9
4. 1
5. 6
6. 7
7. 3
8. 500
9. 80
10. 1100
11. 12,000
12. 2000
13. 100
14. 100
15. 341
16. 1145
17. 125,391
18. 18, 23, 39, 45
19. 89, 91, 109, 111
20. 909, 932, 1087, 1139
21. 1420, 1425, 1429, 1432
22. 11,098, 12,071, 12,131
23. 15,298, 15,309, 15,356

24. C. 50, 48, 45, 40 Arrange the weights from heaviest to lightest.
25. C. 1,500,000 The digit in the ten thousands column is less than 5, so round
down.

Lesson 2: Whole Number Operations
Practice 2.1, page 221
1. 77
2. 100
3. 52
4. 36
5. 190
6. 4078
7. 43
8. 2117
9. 65
10. 114
11. 180
12. 293
13. 483
14. 456
15. 2419
16. 900
17. 11,308
18. 15,185
19. 131,197
20. 30,899
21. B. 88 Calculate: 24 + 8 + 56 = 88

22. C. $13 Calculate: $20 − $7 = $13
Practice 2.2, page 223
1. 484
2. 1000
3. 2736
4. 13
5. 105
6. 21
7. 1350
8. 2625
9. 3376
10. 28
11. 15
12. 6
13. 250
14. 44 r3
15. 300
16. 200 r4
17. 150
18. 67,068
19. 538
20. 384
21. 12,011 r8
22. D. 96 Calculate: 16 × 6 = 96
23. C. $75 Calculate: 15 × 5 = 75
24. 6 Calculate: 12 ÷ 2 = 6

Lesson 3: GED® Test Calculator Skills
Practice 3.1, page 225
1. 153
2. 1187
3. 784
4. 24
5. 27,084
6. 14,442
7. 11,704
8. 54
9. 1580
10. B. 26,179 Press

16741

11. D. $19,900 Press

20

.
.

Practice 3.2, page 227
1. 25
2. 18
3. 35
4. 136
5. 125
6. 5%
7. 2
8. 135
9. 5%
10. C. $336 Press
11. A. 5% Press
display 5%.

.
. The right side of the screen will

Lesson 4: Word Problems
Practice 4.1, page 229
1. C. 10 No paint is needed for the floor, so ignore the 700 square feet. 3500
square feet of wall space ÷ 350 square feet per gallon = 10 gallons.
2. D. 22 11 children × 2 party favors per child = 22.
3. A. 5 Calculate: 30 − 25 = 5. The information that Sarah and Kate live 18
miles apart is not needed.
4. 90 Calculate: 450 gallons ÷ 5 gallons of filtered water use per day = 90
days.
5. D. 90 The table states that it takes Joyce 30 minutes to give a pedicure. 3 ×
30 = 90
6. C. $25 Subtract the cost of the manicure & pedicure combination ($35)
from the cost of a makeover ($60). $60 − $35 = $25
7. 42 Calculate: 7 × 6 = 42
8. $162 Calculate: $189 − $27 = $162
Practice 4.2, page 231
1. C. $103 Restaurant D ordered 2 cases of Boston lettuce and 3 cases of
romaine lettuce in July. (2 × $17) + (3 × $23) = $103.
2. B. $18 Calculate: 4 + 4 + 2 + 2 + 1 = 13 total cases, and delivery for the
first 5 cases costs $2 each. 13 − 5 = 8 cases remained after the first 5, so
delivery for those 8 cases costs $1 each. (5 × $2) + (8 × $1) = $18.
3. B. Restaurant B Calculate the totals for each restaurant:

Rest.

Asparagus

Tomatoes

Asparagus +
Tomatoes

A

2 × $22

3 × $15

$44 + $45 = $89

B

4 × $22

1 × $15

$88 + $15 =
$103

C

0 × $22

3 × $15

$0 + $45 = $45

D

1 × $22

4 × $15

$22 + $60 = $82

4. C. 350 Calculate: 3 × 150 = 450 sheets will be used. Since the paper sells
in packages of 400 sheets, 2 packages are needed, and 2 × 400 = 800. 800
− 450 = 350 sheets left over.
5. A. 9 Calculate: 19 ÷ 2 = 9 r1, so the friends can make 9 whole batches
using 2 cups of flour for each batch (and 1 cup will be left over).
6. A. $1500 Calculate: (6 × $750) − $3000 = $1500.

Lesson 5: Distance and Cost
Practice 5, page 233
1. rate;
2. distance; d = rt
3. time;
4. price per unit;
5. cost; c = nr
6. number of units;
7. $48 c = nr
4 × $12 = $48
8. $36 c = nr
12 × $3 = $36
9. $80
10. 5
11. $2
12. 180 miles d = rt

60 × 3 = 180
13. 200 miles d = rt
50 × 4 = 200
14. 1 hour
15. 90 miles per hour

16. 3 hours
17. A. 32

18. D. 55

Number Sense and Problem Solving Practice Questions, pages 234–237
1. D. 96 Multiply: 12 servings × 8 ounces = 96
2. B. $2092 Add to find the total: $839 + $527 + 726 = $2092
3. A. 4 Divide the length of the sample board by the length of the brace you
want: 12 foot board ÷ 2 feet per brace = 6 braces per board. Since you can
get 6 braces from each board, divide the total number of braces you want
by 6: 24 ÷ 6 = 4 boards.
4. B. 21 Use the square root function on your calculator or multiply each
answer option by itself to find 441.
5. A. 30,589 Subtract to find the difference in mileage: 70,040 − 39,451 =
30,589
6. C. $656 You can use your calculator. Multiply: $3280 × 20% = $656
7. A. $5625 Multiply: $125 × 45 = $5625
8. B. 420 Divide distance by time to find Lydia’s speed per hour: 180 ÷ 3 =

60. Then multiply by the number of hours she drove on Tuesday: 60 × 7 =
420.
9. B. 8 Divide the distance by the speed to find the time: 480 ÷ 60 = 8 hours.
10. B. 96 Divide the total cost by price per item to find the number of items:
$1440 ÷ $15 = 96
11. A. $200 Multiply the late fee by the number of times Richard has paid his
bill late: $25 × 8 = $200
12. D. $53 Calculate: 7 × $5 = $35 and 18 × $1 = $18. Add the two amounts:
$35 + $18 = $53.
13. A. 5 Divide. 17,500 total miles ÷ 3,500 miles between oil changes = 5 oil
changes.
14. A. 134 Divide: 536 total children ÷ 4 months = 134 children per month.
15. 198 Subtract to find the difference: 636 − 438 = 198.
16. $1072 Multiply: $268 per payment × 4 payments left = $1072.
17. C. 51, 48, 44, 40
18. C. 2,350,000 Since the digit to the right of the ten thousands place is less
than 5, the digit in the ten thousands place remains the same.
19. A. 83 Calculate: 18 + 23 + 42 = 83
20. A. $6 Calculate: $20 − $14 = $6
21. B. 60 Since the question says “about,” you can use approximate, or
rounded, figures. Round the amounts and add: 8 + 33 + 18 ≈ 10 + 30 + 20
= 60
22. 62 Divide distance by time to find the rate of speed: 248 ÷ 4 = 62
23. C. 18 Calculate: 144 ÷ 8 = 18
24. B. 30 Since the question says “about,” you can use approximate figures.
Round 299 to 300 and 9 to 10 and then divide: 300 ÷ 10 = 30.
25. C. 1200 Use rounded figures: 33 rounds to 30, and 41 pounds rounds to
40: 30 × 40 = 1200.
26. C. $9 Find the total and divide by 4: $21 + $15 = $36, then $36 ÷ 4 = $9.

27. A. $12 Subtract the amount David paid from the total: $128 − $20 = $108.
Then divide the remaining amount by the remaining number of people in
the group: $108 ÷ 9 = $12.
28. D. 260 65 miles per hour × 4 hours = 260 miles.
29. B. $18 Add the cost of a 1-topping
pizza and $2 for each of the 2 additional toppings: $14 + $2 + $2 = $18
30. C. 14 Multiply by 2 for each dollar: 2 × $7 = 14
31. 24 Calculate: $1800 ÷ $75 per month = 24 months
32. 14 Divide the maximum capacity by the number of pages per document:
630 ÷ 45 = 14
Decimals and Fractions

Lesson 1: Decimal Basics
Practice 1, page 239
1. 3.8
2. 6
3. 0.43
4. 0.667
5. 8.1
6. 2.714
7. 0.45
8. 0.08
9. 4.68
10. 1.85
11. 1.029
12. 0.14
13. 5.08, 5.6, 5.8, 5.802

14. 0.1136, 0.115, 0.12, 0.2
15. 4.52, 4.667, 4.8, 14.005
16. 0.8, 0.8023, 0.803, 0.823
17. C. 0.6 g, 0.572 g, 0.0785 g The correct answer lists the weights from
greatest to least. Since none of the weights has a whole number part,
compare the tenths places.
18. D. 1.38 This is the only choice that is rounded to the hundredths place.
Since the number in the thousandths place of 1.3815 is less than 5, round
down.

Lesson 2: Decimal Operations
Practice 2.1, page 241
1. 7.996
2. 10.508
3. 12.26
4. 5.85
5. 7.426
6. 2.11
7. 18.094
8. 5.117
9. 21.32
10. 0.895
11. 3.84
12. 2.35
13. 5.506
14. 21.16
15. 0.645
16. 2.426

17. 0.15
18. 4.88
19. 11.8
20. 14.016
21. 4.522
22. 2.36
23. 17.88
24. 17.225
25. A. 22.25 Add the times: 7.2 + 6.8 + 8.25 = 22.25 minutes. You do not
need to use the 3-mile distance to solve the problem.
26. C. 4.25 Add to find Claudia’s total hours for the week: 8.5 + 9.25 + 8.75 +
10 + 7.75 = 44.25. Then subtract 40 to find the number of overtime hours:
44.25 − 40 = 4.25 hours.
27. A. 1.8 Add the lengths cut from the pipe: 2.8 + 1.4 = 4.2. Then subtract
from 6: 6 − 4.2 = 1.8 meters.
28. C. $55.26 Add the amounts: $16.98 + $31.78 + $6.50 = $55.26.
Practice 2.2, page 243
1. 2.65
2. 12.8
3. 0.496
4. 0.52
5. 3.6
6. 4.09
7. 8.75
8. 3.375
9. 9.6681
10. 24

11. 14.2
12. 15,800
13. 34.1
14. 2.36
15. 0.656
16. 2.64
17. 1.65
18. 4.275
19. 3.696
20. 1.002
21. 0.0072
22. D. 15.16 Multiply 3.79 liters by 4: 3.79 × 4 = 15.16 liters.
23. B. $9.23 Multiply $0.45 × 20.5: $0.45 × 20.5 = $9.225, which rounds to
$9.23.
24. C. 92.9 Divide to find the average daily miles: 278.7 ÷ 3 = 92.9 miles.
25. C. $0.26 There are 19 servings in a box of Toasted Oats. Divide: $4.94 ÷
19 = $0.26.
26. B. 50.0 Find the weight in the table and multiply: 12.5 × 4 = 50 ounces.

Lesson 3: Fraction Basics
Practice 3, page 245
1.
2.
3.
4.

5.
6.
7.
8.
9. 4
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.

24.
25.
26.
27. A.

Of those surveyed,

went to at least one movie. Reduce the

fraction to lowest terms:
28. C.

Raise

to an equivalent fraction with a denominator of 100 by

multiplying both numbers by

Lesson 4: Fraction Operations

Practice 4.1, page 247
1.
2. 1
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26. B.

Add to find the total:

inches.

27. C.

Subtract to find the difference in the lengths:
inches.

28. A.

Subtract the amount sold from the amount on the bolt:
yards.

29. C.

Add the amounts:

Practice 4.2, page 249
1.
2.
3. 14
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10. 14
11.
12. 48
13.
14.
15. 27
16. 8
17.
18.

cups.

19. B. 75 Find

of 400 by multiplying:

20. B. 7 Divide:

Ignore the

remainder since the problem asks how many shirts can be completed.
21. B. 33 You need to find how many

Multiply

22. C.

hours there are in 22 hours. Divide:

inches by 3, the number of panels:

Lesson 5: Fraction and Decimal Equivalencies
Practice 5, page 251
1. B. $20.00 Instead of multiplying $80 by 0.25, you can also find
Find

2. C.

of 480. “Of” in “of the workers” indicates

multiplication, and the decimal equivalent of

is 0.3.

The decimal part of the calculator display equals the fraction

3. B.

4. C. $18.00 Multiply 12 by 1.5. The decimal
to an improper fraction:
5. B.

of $80.

Subtract:

Convert that fraction

. Now multiply:
which equals

6. C. 0.375 Instead of dividing 3 by 8, think: 3 ÷ 8 means

inch.
which equals

0.375.

Lesson 6: Decimals and Fractions on the Number Line
Practice 6, page 253

.

The number line is in increments of

1. C.

to identify comes halfway between

, and the value you are asked

and 1.

2. D. 2.8 The number line is in increments of 0.2, and the value you are asked
to identify comes halfway between 2.6 and 3.
3. C. 2 A minus B is
Angela gave 16 of 24 cookies to her neighbor:

4.

5. 4.625 Each increment on this number line is 0.125 greater than the
previous increment.
6.

Each increment on the number line is
increment.

7.

Each increment on the number line is

greater than the previous
greater than the previous

increment.
Each increment on the number line is

8.

greater than the previous

increment.

Lesson 7: Decimal and Fraction Calculator Skills
Practice 7, page 255
1. 7.379
To work with mixed fractions on the TI-30XS MultiView™, use the

2.

function above the
number will appear on the right-hand side of the display.
3. $380.25
4. 42
5. $84.44 Multiply:
6. $79.74 Divide:

Round to get $84.44.

. The

7. $1,475 Multiply:
cups Add:

8.

.
.

9. B. $6.67 Multiply the weight of the quilt by
which rounds to $6.67.
10. C. 24 You need to find

of 64. Multiply.

acres.

Decimals and Fractions Practice Questions, pages 256–259
1. C.

Subtract:

2. B. $0.25 Divide the cost by the number of servings:
which rounds to $0.25.

,

3. C. $1386.20 To find the amount the 12-month plan will cost a customer,
multiply $98.85 by 12 and add $200:
4. C. $30.12 Multiply using your calculator. Use 10.5 for
which rounds to $30.12.
5. B. 2.85 Since the answer choices are decimals, use your calculator. Use
decimals instead of fractions:
and
To
find the average, add the three weights and divide the total by 3:

6. C.

Divide:

which equals

.

7. B. 57 Subtract
from
and divide the difference by . To do the
work quickly, use the fraction keys on your calculator or change the
fractions to decimals:
8. D. $90.00 Brand B costs $0.09 more than Brand A, so the school will save
$0.09 on each marker. Multiply the savings by

9. B.

Add the times for the appointments:

10. C. 10 Divide

hours by the amount of time needed for a routine

physical:

Therefore, Jennifer

can complete 10 physicals. Ignore the fraction remainder.
11. D.
Write the fraction and reduce it to lowest terms. You can save time
by using the fraction key on your calculator, which automatically reduces
a fraction to lowest terms. Press 5500
. The right-hand
side of the display will read
.
12. C. $7.25 The first hour costs $3.50, and there are
3 half hours, or

hours left. There are

hours, so you will pay

Write a fraction and reduce:

13.

14. 0.84 Subtract to compare:
15. B.

Subtract:

Thus, 75 out of 250, or

, have not

been loaded. Reduce:
Find a common denominator and subtract:

16. B.

17. A. 285 To find

18. C.

of 380, multiply. Change

To find half of

, either multiply by

to 0.75. Then

or divide by 2. Both results

are the same:
19. D. core box, classic, bevel, cutter You could change the fractions to
decimals to solve the problem, but the quickest method is to rewrite the

fractions with a common denominator of 32:
cutter:
core box:

;
;

classic:
bevel:

;
.

Then arrange the like fractions from least to greatest by their numerators.
20. Points should be placed at

and

. The most Joe will eat will be

his pizza, so the minimum he’ll have left over will be
Joe will eat will be
the pizza.

of

of it. The least

, so the maximum he’ll have left over will be

of

21. C. 8 Divide: 60 ÷ 7.5 = 8 days.
22. C. 150 You need to find

23. A.

of 240. Multiply:

Multiply:

24. B. 56 Multiply:
25. C. 17.9 Maya travels five segments of the route. Add to find the total
distance: 2.4 + 4.3 + 3.6 + 3.6 + 4.0 = 17.9.
26. D. 5 Add to find the total amount to be cut off:
Subtract from
27. B. $535.60 Multiply $26.38 by 20 and add $8 to the result: $26.38 × 20 =
$527.60. Then: $527.60 + $8.00 = $535.60.

28. 80. Divide: 60 ÷ 0.75 = 80.
Add the fractions and subtract the total from 1:

29.

Then:

Ratio, Proportion, and Percent

Lesson 1: Ratio and Proportion
Practice 1.1, page 261
1.
2.
3.
Add 12 + 18 = 30 to find the total workers.

4.
5.
6.
7.

Subtract 32 − 20 = 12 to find the free throws missed.

8.

Add 10 + 14 = 24 to find the total students.

9.
10. A. 9:11 Write the ratio in fraction form and reduce:
11. B. 3 to 10 Calculate:
12. B.

Subtract to find the voters who have made a decision: 600 − 150 =

450. Write the ratio and reduce:
13. C. 1 to 2 Subtract to find the amount owed: $1200 − $400 = $800. Write
the ratio and reduce: 400 to 800 = 1 to 2.

14. D. 8:3 Subtract to find the number of losses: 77 − 56 = 21. Write the ratio
and reduce:
Practice 1.2, page 263
1. 12
2. 45
3. 2.5 or
4. 60
5. $371
6. 96
7. 2.1 or
8. 72
9. 12.5 or
10. $8.94
11. 1.25 or
12. 37.5 or
13. 18
14. 32
15. $45.50
16. 28
17. B. $1.23 Calculate:
$1.23.
18. C. 96 Calculate:
19. B. 23 Calculate:

; $0.98 × 5 ÷ 4 = $1.225, which rounds to

20. B. 345 Calculate:
21. A.

150 × 4.6 ÷ 2 = 345.

Write the proportions using fractions. The process is the same:
.

22. A. 155 × 7 ÷ 2.5 Set up the proportion and think about the order of
operations you would need to solve for x:

Lesson 2: Percents
Practice 2, page 265
1. base = $1000
part = $200
rate = 20%
2. base = 80
part = 72
rate = 90%
3. base = $13,700
part = $2,740
rate = 20%
4. base = $2000
part = $500
rate = 25%
5. base = 40
part = 60
rate = 150%
60 is 150% of 40. The word of indicates that 40 is the base.
6. base = $38
part = $3.23
rate = 8.5%

7. base = $900
part = $135
rate = 15%
8. base = $10.70
part = $1.07
rate = 10%
9. base = 800
part = 200
rate = 25%
10. base = 12,500
part = 5,000
rate = 40%
11. A.

Add the wins and losses to find the total games played: 9 + 3 =

12; then write the proportion:

To solve the proportion, you need

to find the expression that multiplies 9 and 100 and divides by 12. Only
choice (A) does this.
12. D. 50% Bravo played 12 games (6 + 6 = 12). Then

and 6 × 100

÷ 12 = 50.
13. C. $32 To find 25% of $128, solve the proportion:
$128 × 25 ÷ 100 = $32. Since 25% =
you can also find the answer by dividing $128 by 4.

Lesson 3: Using the Percent Formula
Practice 3.1, page 267
1. $5
2. 180
3. 140
4. 95%

5. 25%
6. 3%
7. 17
8. $60
9. 200%
10. 5%
11. 8%
12. $3.91
or 6.5%

13.
14. $364

15. 62.5% or
16. 72
17. C. 60% Calculate: 72 ÷ 120 = 0.6 = 60%.
18. B. $2,385 Calculate: $2,250 × 0.06 = $135, and $2,250 + $135 = $2,385.
19. D. $6.90 Calculate: $46 × 0.15 = $6.90.
20. D. 70% Find what percent $45.50 is of $65 by dividing: $45.50 ÷ $65 =
0.7, which equals 70%.
21. A.

You need to divide the part ($3) by the whole ($50) to find the

rate; however, choice (D) states $3 ÷ $50, which equals 0.06. You still
need to change 0.06 to a percent, which you can do by multiplying by 100.
If you write a proportion to solve the problem, you will see that choice (A)
is correct.
Practice 3.2, page 269
1. $175
2. 280
3. 6.4

4. $200
5. 30
6. $84
7. 200
8. 9
9. $13.50
10. 25%
11. $75
12. $9.30
13. 900
14. 90%
15. $780
16. $3120
17. 4000
18. 10%
19. C. $1,230.00 Solve for the base:
20. C. $1,200,000 Solve for the base.
21. B.

Set up the problem as a proportion:

To solve the

proportion, you would multiply 160 × 100 and divide by 5. Only choice
(B) carries out those operations.
22. C. 720. The base is 3600, the total number who received the application.
The part is the unknown number who returned the application. Since 20%
= 0.2, you can solve for the part by multiplying the base by the rate: 3600
× 0.2 = 720.

Lesson 4: Percent Calculator Skills

Practice 4, page 271
1. $59.80
2. $96
3. $15.12
4. 40
5. 3%
6. 2080
7. 25%
8. 70
9. 25.2
10. 79
11. 2.5% or
12. 48
13. 78%
14. $16
15. 250
16. 14
17. 7%
18. 276
19. C. $8.20 Chanel’s order falls between $50.01 and $100. Find 5% of $84:
press:
The right side of the display reads 4.2, or $4.20. Add
$4: $4.20 + $4 = $8.20.
20. A. $0.30 Find the shipping and handling for Jason’s order: 8% of $110 =
$8.80. Find the shipping and handling for Zola’s order: 5% of $90 =
$4.50, and $4.50 + $4.00 = $8.50. Then find the difference: $8.80 − $8.50
= $0.30.
21. C. 88% Press: 3190 3625
. The right side of the display reads
0.88. You could also simply divide: 3190 ÷ 3625 = .88. Then mentally

translate .88 into 88%.
22. D. 15% Divide strikeouts (63) by at bats (410): press: 63 410
The right side of the display reads 0.153658537, which rounds to 15%.

.

Lesson 5: Simple Interest
Practice 5, page 273
1. $360
2. $56
3. $420
4. $480
5. $1137.50
6. $1998. Note that

year.

7. $1700
8. D. $1300 + ($1300 × 0.09 × 1.5) Find the interest by multiplying the
amount borrowed ($1300) by the interest expressed as a decimal (0.09) by
the time period in years (1.5). To find the amount paid back, the amount
borrowed must be added to the interest. Only choice (D) shows this series
of operations.
9. A. $2400 Multiply: $8000 × 0.06 × 5 = $2400.
10. B. $1545 Find the amount of interest: for the time period, use

months,

which equals , or 0.75; multiply: $1500 × 0.04 × 0.75 = $45. Add to
find the amount paid back: $1500 + $45 = $1545.
11. B. $144 Find the interest for each loan option: Option A: $2400 × 0.12 ×
2.5 = $720; Option C: $2400 × 0.09 × 4 = $864. Subtract to find the
difference: $864 − $720 = $144.
12. D. $3640 Find the interest she will owe: $2800 × 0.1 × 3 = $840. Add to
find the amount she will pay back: $2800 + $840 = $3640.

Lesson 6: Percent of Change

Practice 6, page 275
1. 50%
2. 38%
3. 200%
4. 45%
5. 20%
6. 32%
7. 21%
8. 86%
9. 420%
10. 34%
11. B. 60% Subtract: $448 − $280 = $168. Divide by the original weekly pay:
$168 ÷ $280 = 0.6, which equals 60%.
12. B. 25% Subtract: $48 − $36 = $12. Divide by the original price: $12 ÷
$48 = 0.25, which equals 25%.
13. C. 6% Subtract: $636 − $600 = $36.
Divide by the original rent: $36 ÷ $600 = 0.06, which equals 6%.
14. C. 125% The wholesale price of the model is $63, and the retail price is
$141.75. Subtract: $141.75 − $63 = $78.75. Divide by the wholesale price:
$78.75 ÷ $63 = 1.25, which equals 125%.
15. B. 30% The retail price of the model is $150.50, and the member’s price
is $105.35. Subtract: $150.50 − $105.35 = $45.15. Divide by the retail
price: $45.15 ÷ 150.50 = 0.3, which equals 30%.
Ratio, Proportion, and Percent Practice Questions, pages 276–279
1. C. 1:11 Subtract to find the dollars spent on other costs: $360,000 −
$30,000 = $330,000. Write a ratio and reduce:
2. A.

Write a proportion:

To solve it, multiply 2 × 50 and

divide by 5. Only choice (A) performs these operations.
3. B. $7.56 Find 35% of $5.60: $5.60 × 0.35 = $1.96; add: $1.96 + $5.60 =
$7.56. Another way to get the answer is to find 135% of $5.60. $5.60 ×
1.35 = $7.56.
4. D. $20,000 The current worth of the car ($12,000) is part of the base.
Solve for the base: $12,000 ÷ 0.6 = $20,000.
5. C. 42 Solve the proportion:
6. A. 6% The commission is part of the sales. Solve for the part: $954 ÷
$15,900 = 0.06 = 6%.
7. B. 1:6 Add to find the total time spent on the project:
hours.

hours. Write a ratio using decimals and reduce:

8. B. 36% Add to find the acres used for grains, vegetables, or fruits: 5,200 +
9,200 = 14,400. Solve for percent: 14,400 ÷ 40,400 = 0.36 = 36%.
9. A. 35,600 Calculate the decrease in acres of dairy farmland: 22,000 × 20%
= 4,400. Subtract that amount from the total acreage of farmland to
determine how many acres of farmland will remain: 40,000 − 4,400 =
35,600.
10. A.

The total fat is 3 + 13 = 16 grams. Write the ratio of saturated fat (3

grams) to the total (16 grams). The ratio cannot be simplified.
11. B. 10 Write a proportion and solve:

Then 4 × 12.5 ÷ 5 = 10

inches.
12. 138 Write a proportion and solve:

Then 3 × 184 ÷ 4 = 138

female patients.
13. $900 If 20% is the amount of the discount, then the sale price must be
80% of the original price. The sale price is the part, and the original price
is the base. Solve for the base: $720 ÷ 0.8 = $900.
14. B. 40 If the ratio of wins to losses is 5:4, then the ratio of wins to games

played is 5:9. Write a proportion and solve:
games won.
15. C. 192 Add to find the number that did not answer “no”: 16% + 32% =
48%. Find 48% of 400: 400 × 0.48 = 192.
16. C. 20% To find the percent decrease, subtract the lower price from the
higher price and divide the difference by the original price. In this case,
the original price is $25, the higher price. To change the answer to a
percent, you must move the decimal point two places to the right or
multiply by 100.
17. A. 121 When the rate is greater than 100%, the part will be greater than
the base. Solve for the part: 55 × 2.2 = 121.
18. D. 18% There are 6 grams of fat in the roast beef sandwich, so there are 6
× 9 = 54 calories in the sandwich from fat. The total number of calories in
the sandwich is 300. Find what percent 54 is of 300: 54 ÷ 300 = 0.18 =
18%.
19. D. $264 Write a proportion and solve:
20. C. 175 The 140 employees who have more than 12 days of sick leave are
part of the whole workforce. You need to solve for the base: 140 ÷ 0.8 =
175.
21. D. 825 If the ratio of sold to unsold tickets is 11 to 1, then the ratio of sold
to total tickets is 11 to 12. Write a proportion and solve:
22. C. $2464 Use the formula for finding simple interest: i = prt: $2200 × 0.08
× 1.5 = $264. To find the amount in the account at the end of the time, add
the interest to the original investment: $2200 + $264 = $2464.
23. B. $328 Once you find the discount by multiplying 0.2 by $410, you will
need to subtract the discount from $410 to find the sale price.
24. D. 330 After changing
solve:

to the decimal 2.75, write a proportion and

There were 140 customers on Sunday, and 91 made a

25. C.

purchase. Therefore, 140 − 91 did not make a purchase. To find the
percent rate, divide the difference by 140, the total number of customers
on Sunday (the base). Then move the decimal point two places to the right
or multiply by 100 to change the answer to a percent. Only choice (C)
shows this sequence of operations.
26. 270 Write a proportion and solve:
27.

If Marcie spends 15 hours answering telephones, she spends 40 − 15, or
25 hours doing other tasks. Write a ratio and reduce:

Data, Statistics, and Probability

Lesson 1: Tables and Pictographs
Practice 1, page 281
1. 9 Calculate: 22,707 ÷ 2523 = 9
2. 6% Calculate: (139,510 − 130,748) ÷ 139,510 ≈ 0.06, or 6%.
3. 300 There are
symbols in the “North” row and
Two more symbols translates to 300 more books.

in the “South” row.

4. 3000 Count the number of symbols, 20, and multiply by 150.
5. D. Reads or pretends to read If 100 children were surveyed in each year,
then the number of children who recognized all letters increased from 11
to 17. To find the percent change, use the percent change formula:
or a roughly 55% increase. Performing
similar calculators for all categories will reveal that “reads or pretends to
read” showed the least percent increase:

. Note that

simply subtracting 66 from 67 does not give you the percent of change.
6. C. 119 In 2010, 34% of 3-year-old children could write their own names.
Find 34% of 350: 350 × 0.34 = 119.

7. C. 375 There are

car symbols. Each symbol represents 50 cars.

Multiply:
8. A. 75 Compare the symbols for the two rows. There are

more symbols

for 8 A.M. to noon than there are after 4:30 P.M. Multiply:

Lesson 2: Bar and Line Graphs
Practice 2.1, page 283
1. 50
2. about 15 Estimate 38 complaints in 2011 and 22 complaints in 2006.
Subtract and round.
3. 20% The number of complaints decreased by 5, from 25 to 20. This
represents a
decrease.
4. about $20 million Estimate values from the graph and subtract. Be sure to
use the black bars that represent cost.
5. Film A Film A has the biggest difference in size between the bar
representing box-office receipts and the bar representing cost.
6. 150% Calculate:
7. A. 40 There are approximately 110 T-shirts, more than 40 books, and a
little fewer than 30 toys sold. Combined, about 70 books and toys were
sold. Subtract 70 from 110, and you have about 40.
8. D. $1000 There were about 50 games sold, so 25 sold for $16 and 25 sold
for $24. Calculate: (25 × 16) + (25 × 24) = 1000.
9. C. 14:3 Write a ratio and simplify:
10. D. September Add the 2-day and 5-day permits for each month. Only
September’s permits equal 80.
Practice 2.2, page 285

1. October The point representing October is lower than the point
representing the previous month, and the line leading to it slopes
downward. This indicates a decrease.
2. 270 Estimate totals for the three months and add.
3. from June to July The number of visits increased more from August to
September, but because the number in June was so low, the percentage
increase from June to July is nearly 100%.
4. $10 Estimate values and subtract.
5. 20% The price increased from about $25 to about $30, an increase of $5.

6. $30 The price increased from about $18 to about $46. This increase is
almost $30.
7. A. 1930 to 1940 The price of goods decreased over two decades, 1920 to
1940. Note the downward movement of the line. Only the time period
1930 to 1940 is included among the answer options.
8. D.

The price of the same goods was about $20 in 1970 and $100 in

2000. Write a ratio and simplify:
9. B. 50 There were about 390 sales in Store 2 and 340 sales in Store 1 in the
sixth week: 390 − 340 = 50.
10. D. Week 5 The steepest line segment leads from week 4 to week 5,
indicating the largest increase in sales from the previous week.

Lesson 3: Circle Graphs
Practice 3, page 287
1. 29% Find those two categories on the circle graph and add.
2.
3. $630 Use the total budget. $2250 × 28% = $630.
4. $30.60 17 cents of every dollar are spent on water heating: $180 × 0.17 =

$30.60.
5. Heating and Air-Conditioning The section labeled “Heating and AirConditioning” takes up more than half the circle.
6. Cooking and Refrigeration This section is 11 cents of every dollar, which
is about 10%.
7. A. 10 According to the graph, a records clerk spends 25%, or , of his or
her time preparing documents. Then 25% of 40 hours is 10 hours.
8. D. 56% If 44% of the time is spent on data entry, then 100% − 44%, which
equals 56%, is spent on other tasks.
9. B. 10% Add: 3 cents plus 7 cents is 10 cents. Then 10 cents out of 100
cents is
or 10%.
10. C. $48 40 cents out of every dollar, or 40%, is spent on public bonds.
Then 40% of $120 is found by multiplying: $120 × 0.4 = $48.

Lesson 4: Measures of Central Tendency
Practice 4.1, page 289
1. 57 Count the number of tally marks and add.
2. 6 Count the number of tally marks and subtract.
3. 1:2 Calculate:
4. 3:4 Calculate:
5. 46 Count the tally marks and add.
6. 14% Count the total number of tally marks, then divide:
7. B.

There are 16 tally marks next to the reason “wrong size.” Add all

the tally marks: 16 + 20 + 3 + 5 = 44. Write a ratio and reduce.
8. C. 45% Adding all the tally marks, you find that there were 44 clothing
returns in all. Since there are 20 tally marks by “unwanted gift,”
or ≈

45% of the total reasons given were “unwanted gift.”
9. D. 39% Calculate: 35 applicants had a speed under 30 wpm, out of a total
of 90 applicants, so
≈ 39%.
10. B. 1:2 To find those who could type above 45 wpm, add: 18 + 12 = 30.
The number typing below 45 wpm is found by adding 35 + 25 = 60. Write
a ratio and reduce:
Practice 4.2, page 291
1. mean: 80.14
median: 80
mode: 82
2. mean: $8487.17
median: $8208.50
mode: none
3. mean: $4.76
median: $4.50
mode: $4.50
4. mean: 309 miles
median: 300 miles
mode: none
5. mean: $101.83
median: $101.81
mode: none
6. mean: 86
median: 88
mode: 88
7. mean: 99.1°
median: 99°
mode: 98° and 100°

8. mean: 1.9 inches
median: 1.8 inches
mode: none
9. mean: 305
median: 305
mode: 305
10. mean: 38.8 hours
median: 40 hours
mode: 40 hours
11. A. $117,100 Add the amounts in the column labeled “Asking Price” and
divide by 6, the number of prices listed.
12. C. $116,500 Arrange the selling prices in order: $124,800; $118,400;
$116,500; $116,500; $109,000; $103,600. Since the number of items is
even, there are two in the middle: $116,500 and $116,500. Since these are
the same amount, the average of the two is also $116,500.
13. A.

To find the mean, add the numbers and divide by

the number of items in the set. In this case, there are 4 numbers.
14. C. $900 The median is the middle amount. Arrange the amounts in order
and find the middle amount.
15. B. 14 The mode is the number that occurs most often. Only 14 occurs
more than once in the data.

Lesson 5: Line Plots
Practice 5, page 293
1. C. Look for a line plot that reflects that two zebras have 26 stripes, two
have 28, two have 30, etc.
2. B. Look for a line plot that reflects three classes with 29 students, two
classes with 32, etc.
3. Draw a dot for each person not already represented in the line plot. Your
completed line plot should look like this:

4. B. 3 Three people grew three vegetables—that’s more people than grew
any other specific number of vegetables.

Lesson 6: Histograms
Practice 6, page 295
1. C. Look for the histogram that begins with 30 and that has a second bar at
56, a third bar at 80, etc.
2. D. Look for the histogram that begins with 15 and that has a second bar at
22, a third bar at 35, etc.
3. C. 36% Estimate the percentages represented by the four bars that cover
the time period of December 9 through January 5: 8%, 9%, 9%, and 10%.
Add those estimates to find the approximate percentage of cases reported
during that entire time period, resulting in 36%.

Lesson 7: Probability
Practice 7.1, page 297
1.

, 0.4, 40% Calculate:

2.

, 0.3, 30% There were 12 non-blue spins out of 40 total spins:
.

3. , 0.2, 20% Calculate:
4.

, 0.25, 25% Calculate:

5.

, 0.33,

Calculate:

6. C. 50% There are 12 cards in the deck, and 6 are diamonds:

There are 3 clubs, so 9 are not clubs:

7. A.

.

8. D. 2 out of 5 Sixteen out of 40 trials resulted in tails:

.

9. A. 3 out of 5 Twenty-four out of 40 trials resulted in heads:

.

Practice 7.2, page 299
The events are independent, so multiply:

1.
2.

Because the first card is replaced, the two choices are independent. The
cards greater than 5 are 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
Multiply:
Half of the sections are red, so there is a

3.

chance that the result will be

red. Each spin is independent. Multiply:
The marble is not replaced, so the probabilities are not the same. There

4.
is a

chance the first marble is red. But once one red marble is removed,

the odds of a second red become

. Multiply:

Each flip is independent and has a

5.

.

chance of coming up heads:

.
Half of the numbers on a standard die are odd:

6.
7. A.

The probability of rolling a 5 is

.

. Of the six equal sections on the

spinner, three are even numbers, so there is a

, or

, chance of spinning

an even number. Multiply the probability of each outcome:
8. D. There is a
spinning a 3.

chance of rolling a 3 on the die and a

chance of

.

9. C. 1 out of 3 Of the 10 cards, 6 are marked with a square; therefore, there
is a 6 in 10, or , chance of getting a square on the first pick. Now there
are only 9 cards left, and 5 are squares, so there is a a

chance of getting

a square on the second pick. Multiply:
10. B. 80% After the five white chips are removed from the bag, the bag
contains 10 chips, with 8 green and 2 white. The probability of getting
green is
, which equals 80%.

Lesson 8: Combinations
Practice 8.1, page 301
1. 5 Since Rob is choosing 4 team members, each possible team leaves out
exactly 1 employee. There are 5 possible employees Rob could leave out,
so there are 5 possible teams.
2. 10 Either an organized list or a table will work. To solve this problem
using a list organized in columns, assign the books letters: A, B, C, D, and
E. Count possible combinations:

A and B
A and C
A and D
B and C
B and D
C and D
combinations combinations combinations combinations combinations combinations
ABC

ACD

ABD

ACE

ADE

BCD

BDE

BCE

ABE
3. 4 Use either a table or an organized list, as in question 2.
4. 10 The problem does not give the names of the friends, so assign them
letters: A, B, C, D, E. Then use a table or organized list, as above, to find
possible combinations of two.
5. A. 5 Use a table or an organized list.
6. B. 6 Even though three people are going to the conference, you already

CDE

know that one of them will be Regan. So the question is really asking how
many combinations of two out of Regan’s four employees could also go.
Name the employees A, B, C, and D, and use a table or organized list.
7. C. 10 The gender of the people sent to the signing is not relevant to
answering this question, so you are being asked for possible combinations
of 3 out of 5. Use a table or an organized list.
8. A. 20 Assign letters to the six people (A, B, C, D, E, and F), and then use a
table or organized list.
9. B. 20 This question asks you to add the number of possible groups of 2 out
of 5 to the number of possible groups of 3 out of 5. Perform each of those
tasks separately, or realize that they will have the same solution because
choosing 3 to be in the group is the same as choosing 2 to be out of the
group. Then, add the possible combinations together.
Practice 8.2, page 303
1. 48 Use the fundamental counting principle: 4 (types of bread) × 3 (types of
meat) × 4 (condiments) = 48.
2. 24 Use the fundamental counting principle: 3 (restaurant certificates) × 2
(T-shirts) × 4 (hats) = 24.
3. 27 Use the fundamental counting principle: 3 × 3 × 3 = 27.
4. 24 On Friday, Julio has 2 choices. On Saturday, he has 3. On Sunday, he
has 4 choices. Use the fundamental counting principle: 2 × 3 × 4 = 24
5. D. 5184 There are three words in the passphrase: 24 choices for the first, 9
for the second, 24 for the third. Use the fundamental counting principle:
24 × 9 × 24 = 5184.
6. A. 10. You are asked for combinations from one set of items. Use either a
table or an organized list. You can assign the superpowers letters A–E to
make it easier to see how to combine them.
7. C. 1024 Use the fundamental counting principle: 4 (meats) × 4
(vegetables) × 4 (noodles) × 4 (broth) × 4 (spices) = 1024.
8. A. 125 Use the fundamental counting principle: 5 (medications) × 5
(dietary changes) × 5 (vitamins) = 125.

Lesson 9: Permutations
Practice 9, page 305
1. 120 This is a permutations problem, because order matters. The question
asks how many sequences of five items are possible. 5 × 4 × 3 × 2 × 1 =
120.
2. 24 This question asks you how many sequences of four items are possible.
4 × 3 × 2 × 1 = 24
3. 10 This is a combinations problem: you are being asked how many groups
of three are possible, given five students. Order does not matter. Use a
table or an organized list; you may name the students A–E if that is easier.
4. 720 This is a permutations problem, because order matters. 6 × 5 × 4 × 3 ×
2 × 1 = 720.
5. C. 360 This is a permutations problem, in which you are counting possible
sequences of four out of six tasks. 6 × 5 × 4 × 3 = 360.
6. B. 6 This is a permutations problem: the question asks you how many
possible sequences of three types of flowers are possible. 3 × 2 × 1 = 6.
7. D. 5,040 This is a permutations problem, because you are told that the role
of Bystander #1 is different from the role of Bystander #4. (Notice the
phrase “specific roles” in the question.) Thus, order matters. The question
is asking how many sequences of four are possible given ten people. 10 ×
9 × 8 × 7 = 5040.
8. B. 20 This is a combinations problem asking how many groups of three out
of six are possible. Use a table or an organized list.
9. C. 120 This is a permutations problem asking how many sequences of
three out of six are possible. 6 × 5 × 4 = 120.

Lesson 10: Compare Proportions in Different Formats
Practice 10, Page 307
1. 2005; 6.25% The pie chart shows that

of sales, or 25%, were foreign in

1975. For 2005, add the domestic and foreign sales to get the total sales, 8

million. Calculate the percentage of foreign sales as

,

which is greater than the percentage in 1975. The difference in the foreign
sales as a percentage of total sales between 1975 and 2005 is 6.25%.
2. No Rex received 9 votes, and the total votes, as added from the graph, are
19. Rex received
, rounded to the nearest tenth of a
percent. So Rex received a smaller proportion of the votes than he
predicted.
3. C. The brakes are worse than the competitors’ brakes by less than 1
mph/s. Choose two points to calculate the slope of the graph, for example,
(0, 50) and (3.5, 0). The calculation shows the rate of deceleration is
mph/s (the negative slope is a result of the car slowing
down rather than speeding up). That is 0.7 mph/s slower than the
competitors’ brakes. The engineers have a little more work to do.
4. A. The person is more beautiful than any of the models. The given
image has a height of 11 inches and a width of 7 inches. Using the ratio
given of

, the ratio is

. This is closer to 1.6 than any of

the numbers given in the chart, meaning that this person is more beautiful
according to this standard.
Data, Statistics, and Probability Practice Questions, pages 309–314
1. B. 2007 Only the bar for 2007 falls between 500 and 600 on the scale.
2. B. 40% Estimate the values for 1998 and 1999. Then find the percent of
decrease. Estimate roughly 650 and 390 for 1998 and 1999. Subtract. 650
− 390 = 260. Divide by the original number. 260 ÷ 650 = 0.4 = 40%
3. A.

Jim and his friends bought a total of 12 tickets (4 people × 3

tickets). Then 12 out of
4. D. 50° Arrange the low temperatures in order: 55°, 53°, 50°, 50°, 49°, and
48°. Find the middle of the list. Since there are two temperatures in the
middle and both are 50°, the mean of the two must be 50°.
5. C. 1.56 Add the six amounts, and divide by 6: 0.45 + 0.63 + 1.34 + 3.53 +

2.57 + 0.84 = 9.36, and 9.36 ÷ 6 = 1.5 inches. It makes sense to use your
calculator on this question.
6. C. Woodland Hills Mentally subtract the low temperature from the high
temperature for each area. The greatest difference is in Woodland Hills.
68° − 50° = 18°.
7. B. 2005 Ticket sales increased each year from 2001 through 2004. The
first year in which they declined was 2005.
8. C. 2008 The line graph shows the steepest increase (line rising from left to
right) from 2007 to 2008.
9. C. 32% Eight customers chose a mouse pad. 8 ÷ 25 = 0.32 = 32%
10. A. 1 in 2 Of the 52 cards, 26 are either hearts or diamonds:
11. 3.5 or

Add the hours, and divide by 6, the number of weeks: 5 + 3.5 +

4 + 0 + 1.5 + 7 = 21 hours, and 21 hours ÷ 6 = 3.5 hours.
Only the numbers 4 and 5 are greater than 3. The probability is 2 out of

12.
5,

, or 0.4.

13. B. 41% The three candidates who received the smallest percentages of the
vote also received the smallest number of votes. Add: 9% + 14% + 18% =
41%
14. C. Bowen and Utley Since

= 60%, look for two candidates whose

combined percent is close to 60%. Since 24% + 35% = 59%, the correct
answer is choice (C).
15. D. 5100 × 0.09 Grace Reiner received 9%, which equals 0.09. You know
the percent and the base. Multiply to find the part.
16. B. March The lines for both companies cross in March.
17. B. 5900 Company A’s orders continue to climb at about the same rate.
Imagine extending the solid line to the next month. The line would reach
to almost 6000. Choice (A) is too high an increase.
18. C. 540 The graph indicates that about 3000 orders were placed in April.
Multiply: 3000 × 18% = 540.

19. B. 24.5 Use only the Shots Attempted column. Put the numbers in order,
and find the middle: 29, 27, 26, 25, 24, 24, 23, 18. The two in the middle
are 25 and 24. Find the mean of those numbers: 25 + 24 = 49, and 49 ÷ 2 =
24.5.
20. D. 10 Use the Shots Made column. The mode is the number that occurs
most often. In this case the mode is 10, which occurs three times.
21. B.

The probability that a marble is red is

marble is white is

, or

. The chance that a

. Because the first marble is replaced, the two

events are independent. Multiply:
22. B.

, or

.

To find the mean, add the three numbers and divide by 3,

the number of months in the list. There are 36 employees, but you don’t
need this number to solve the problem.
23.

The probability of rolling one “one” is
of rolling two ones:

. Multiply to find the chance

.

24. 210 Arrange the numbers in order, and find the middle number: 305, 276,
210, 158, 54.
25. 625 Use the fundamental counting principle: 5 × 5 × 5 × 5 = 625.
26. 4 This is a combinations problem; use a table or an organized list.
27. 720 This is a permutations question, because the board is not simply
picking three members. Rather, those members will also be ordered in a
specific way.
Multiply:
10 options for president × 9 options for secretary × 8 options for treasurer
= 720.
28. 20% First find the total number of patients: 16 (colds and flu) + 13 (cuts
and scrapes) + 12 (sprained muscles) + 7 (tetanus shots) + 12 (severe
headches) = 60. Now find what percent of 60 is represented by 12:

29. B. 4:3 The ratio of patients with colds or flu to the number of patients with
severe headaches is 16:12, which simplifies to 4:3.
30. B. 180–199 lbs The bar corresponding to this weight range is the tallest
bar on the graph.
31. B. Participants weighing less than 200 lbs Choices (C) and (D) are both
subsets of choice (B), and so cannot be correct. Add the totals of the
columns in the graph to reveal that the total for choice (B) is greater than
that of choice (A).
32. B. 20 miles per gallon Seven cars got 20 miles per gallon on average,
more than in any other line of the table.
33. A.

One car got 35 miles per gallon, and two got 15 miles per gallon.

34. Draw dots on the line plot so that it looks like the following:

35. D.

Only choice (D) reflects that 48% of visitors arrived during the fourth time
period listed.
Algebra Basics, Expressions, and Polynomials

Lesson 1: The Number Line and Signed Numbers
Practice 1.1, page 317
1. 5
2. 45
3. 13
4. 1
5. 1
6. 10
7. −3
8. 13
9. −4
10. 2
11. −22
12. 32
13. −50
14. −11
15. 25
16. −35
17. −11
18. 11
19. 10
20. 75
21. 12
22. 2
23. −1
24. −13

25. B. 2 + (−5) The operation starts on + 2 and moves 5 units to the left (a
negative direction).
26. C. 115° Begin with 92°. Then perform the following operations: 92° + 12°
− 5° + 6° − 3° + 13° = 115°
Practice 1.2, page 319
1. 20
2. −21
3. −48
4. 18
5. −10
6. 3
7. −3
8. −5
9. 2
10. −5
11. −28
12. −3
13. −1
14. −75
15. 6
16. −20
17. −300
18. 2
19. −5
20. 660
21. 12

22. −120
23. −125
24. −12
25. 20
26. −1
27. 0
28. B. −7 Substitute the numbers from the spreadsheet for the cells in the
expression and solve. Note that A1 is column A, row 1; A3 is column A,
row 3; and so on:
29. C.
To find the product of two numbers, multiply: 2(8). Then divide by
−8, as directed in the problem.
30. C. The result is a negative number. Do not do any calculations. Instead,
examine the factors. Since there is an odd number of negative factors, the
answer will be negative. This is the only possible option.

Lesson 2: Powers and Roots
Practice 2, page 321
1. 9
2. 4
3. 3
4. 1
5. 9
6. 7
7. 125
8.
9. 16
10. 8

11.
12. 11
13. 6561
14. 1296
15. 12.2
16. 8000
17. 1
18.
19. 15.6
20. 10.9
21. 7.5
22. 23.2
23. 1
24. 256
25. C. 63 To find the volume, you would need to solve 6 × 6 × 6, which can be
written as 63.
26. A. 3−3 Examine the choices. Choices (A) and (D) will result in a fraction,
a value less than 1. Choices (B) and (C) will each have a value of 1 or
greater
Choice (A):
Choice (D):
Since

, choice (A) is correct.

Lesson 3: Scientific Notation
Practice 3, page 323
1. 2.3 × 103

2. 4.2 × 10−4
3. 1.24 × 107
4. 1.432 × 1010
5. 3.6 × 107
6. 9.5 × 10−3
7. 5.8 × 10−7
8. 1.5 × 1011
9. 9 × 10−9
10. 0.0005173
11. 3,700,000
12. 480,000,000
13. 0.000017
14. 0.0072
15. 916,000
16. 85,910,000
17. 0.00000956
18. 2.35 × 104
19. 0.000000001
20. 2,670,000,000
21. 3 × 108
22. B. 4.356 × 104 In scientific notation, the whole-number portion must be a
digit from 1 to 9. Choice (B) is correct because the decimal place must be
moved 4 places.
23. D. 5 × 9.07 × 10−1 In scientific notation, a ton = 9.07 × 10−1 metric tons.
Multiply this by 5 to find the equivalent weight of five tons.

Lesson 4: Order of Operations

Practice 4, page 325
1. 24
2. 1
3. 29
4. 2
5. 7
6. 20
7. 14
8. 55
9. 10
10. 23
11. 161
12. 30
13. 360
14. 4
15. 6
16. C. (1 − 0.75)(28)(30). The total cost of the class can be found by
multiplying 28 members by $30. Since the foundation pays 75%, or 0.75,
the hospital will pay 100% − 75%, or (1 − 0.75). You must multiply the
amount the class will cost by the percent that the hospital will pay. Only
choice (C) performs these operations.
17. B. Add 5 The operations in the brackets must be performed first. Once
these are completed, multiply by 2 and then add 5. Notice that it is not
necessary to find the value of the expression to answer the question.
18. B. 28
22 + 6[(14 − 5) ÷ 3(17 − 14)]
= 22 + 6[9 ÷ 3(3)]
= 22 + 6[9 >÷ 9]
= 22 + 6[1]

= 22 + 6 = 28

Lesson 5: Absolute Value
Practice 5, page 327
1. 18
2. 107
3. 423
4. 95
5. 7,026
6. 18
7. 5,708,432
8. 85.6
9. 42
10. 10.5
11. 163.24
12. 3.14
13. 11
14. −156
15. 156
16. 3
17. −91
18. 0
19. 620
20. −7
21. −20
22. −1
23. 2.125

24. −11
25. D. 10 degrees The change in temperature is the absolute value of the
result of the new temperature minus the old temperature:
, or 10 degrees.
26. D. 16 In order to find out how many blocks Bob walked in total, you also
need to know how long the last leg of his journey (from the post office
back to his apartment) was. To do this, you can think of movement east as
having a positive value and movement west as having a negative value.
So, on the first three legs of his journey Bob walked 5 + –6 + (–2), leaving
him –3 blocks from his house. The last leg of his journey is 3 blocks, and
you can simply add the absolute values of each part of the trip: |5| + |–6| +
|–2| + |3| = 16.
27. C. 120 Add the absolute value of Milania’s score to the absolute value of
Chris’s score:
28. A. 1.5 The question defines absolute error as the absolute value of the
difference between the actual and approximate values: 23.5 − 25 = −1.5,
and |–1.5| = 1.5.

Lesson 6: Algebraic Expressions
Practice 6.1, page 329
1. x − 7
2. 3x2 + x
3. 8x − 10
4. −3x − 2y
5.
6. −8 + 7x
7. 16x + x − 3y
8. x2 + x4
9.

10. 15 +

–6

11. x − (y + 13)
12. (x + 6)2
13. 17 − (2x + y)
14.
15. 2x − 15
16. 4(x − y)
17. 5(x2 − 3)
18.
19. C. $1500 + $0.50(x − 2000) Let x represent the number of tickets sold.
The expression x − 2000 is the number of tickets over 2000 sold. Multiply
this expression by $0.50 to find the amount donated based on ticket sales.
Then add $1500. Only choice (C) shows this sequence of operations.
20. A. (3x + 4y) ÷ (2 + z) The sum of 3 times a number and 4 times a second
number is represented by the expression 3x + 4y. The sum of 2 and a third
number is represented by 2 + z. The first expression is divided by the
second. Parentheses are necessary to clarify the order of operations.
21. B. 6h + 0.03s The correct sequence of operations shows the sum of 6
multiplied by the number of hours (6h) and 3% of the sales, or 0.03s. Only
choice (B) adds these two expressions.
Practice 6.2, page 331
1. x2 + 3x + 2
2. 19y + 13
3. −3x + 54
4. 6x3 + 31x2 + 4
5. 7y + 14
6. 3x + 8

7. 22x − 12
8. 2y2 + y + 9
9. −5x − 17
10. 4x − 7
11. 31
12. 48
13. 8
14. 21
15. 72
16. 80
17. 85
18. −19
19. 9
20. 61
21. D. 3x2 + 4x + 1 Simplify the expression:
3x2 + 3(x − 3) + x + 10
= 3x2 + 3x − 9 + x + 10
= 3x2 + 4x + 1
22. A. x = 2, y =3 Substitute the values in the choices into the expression.
Choice (A) equals −11.
4x2 − 3(y + 6)
= 4(22) − 3(3 + 6)
= 4(4) − 3(9)
= 16 − 27
= −11.
23. A. 20° You need to convert a Fahrenheit temperature to Celsius.

Practice 6.3, page 333
1. 2 × 3
2. 3 × 7
3. 2 × 2 × 3 × 3
4. 2 × 3 × 3 × 3
5. 2 × 5 × 7
6. 6 = 2 × 3; 9 = 3 × 3. GCF = 3; LCM = 2 × 3 × 3 = 18.
7. 45 = 3 × 3 × 5; 75 = 3 × 5 × 5. GCF = 3 × 5 = 15; LCM = 3 × 3 × 5 × 5 =
225.
8. 50 = 2 × 5 × 5; 125 = 5 × 5 × 5. GCF = 5 × 5 = 25; LCM = 2 × 5 × 5 × 5 =
250.
9. C. 15(2 + 5) 30 = 2 × 3 × 5; 75 = 3 × 5 × 5. GCF = 3 × 5 = 15.
10. A.

75 = 3 × 5 × 5; 45 = 3 × 3 × 5.

LCM = 3 × 3 × 5 × 5 = 225.
.

Lesson 7: Expressions and Calculator Skills
Practice 7, page 335
1. 19
2. 15.9
3. 51
4.
5. 10

6. −98
7. 74
8. 146
9. 12
10. −76
11. 57
12. 36
13. −54
14. 24.8
15. 54
16. −45
17. 78
18. 108
19. 459
20. 1430
21. B. 36.2 Use the formula stated in the problem.
P = 2l + 2w
= 2(12.5) + 2(5.6)
= 25 + 11.2
= 36.2
22. D. −2xy Try each expression, x + y = −3; −x + y = 7; xy = −10; and −2xy =
20. The value of choice (D) is greatest.
23. A. 32 If x = 2, then

Lesson 8: Understand Polynomials
Practice 8, page 337
1. Monomial

.

2. Monomial
3. Binomial
4. Trinomial
5. Binomial
6. Trinomial
7. Monomial
8. Monomial
9. Monomial
10. Binomial
11. Trinomial
12. Trinomial
13. Binomial
14. Monomial
15. Binomial
16. First term: 3x4, second term: −2x2, third term: 3
17. First term: 12a2bc
18. First term: 3g, second term: −4h
19. First term: x2 second term: y
20. First term: −4a, second term: −3b2, third term: c
21. First term: 25
22. First term: x2, second term: 3x, third term: −7
23. First term:
24. First term:
25. First term:

26. First term: 49x2y2z2
27. First term: 18y2, second term: −4y2, third term: 8
28. First term: 3h, second term: −4
29. First term: x2, second term: −x
third term: y2, fourth term: −2
30. First term: ab, second term: ab2,
third term: b2, fourth term: −4
31. B. 5 Two variables in the expression have exponents: x3 and x2.
Add the values of the exponents: 3 + 2 = 5
32. B. −1 The coefficients in this expression are 1, −3, −1, and 2.
Add those values:
1 + (−3) + (−1) + 2 = −1

Lesson 9: Simplify Polynomials
Practice 9, page 339
1. Like
2. Like
3. Unlike
4. Unlike
5. Like
6. Unlike
7. Unlike
8. Like
9. Unlike
10. Unlike
11. Like
12. Unlike

13. Like
14. Like
15. Unlike
16. Like
17. Unlike
18. Like
19. Unlike
20. Unlike
21. 7x2y
22. 4b
23. −6a + 3
24. ab2 + 16ab + 3
25. −2x2 + 7
26. 4ab
27. 14g + 14gh
28. −4g2h2 + 2g2 + 2h2 − 4
29. −y2 + 9y
30. −7x2 + y − 3
31. 22y − 7
32. 6x2y + 5y2 − 23
33. 4x3 + 7x2 + 3x + 5
34. −5x2 − 4x + 5
35. −3x3 + 7x2 + x
36. B. 6a2b + 9ab Identify and group like terms. Then combine:
3a2b + 4ab + 3a2b + 5ab
= 3a2b + 3a2b + 4ab + 5ab

= 6a2b + 9ab
37. B. 3 Identify and group like terms. Then combine:
j2 + k3 − 2j3 + 5k3 − 2j2
= j2 − 2j2 + k3 + 5k3 − 2j3
= −j2 + 6k3 − 2j3
sThe expression has three terms.

Lesson 10: Add and Subtract Polynomials
Practice 10.1, page 341
1. 5x + 6
2. 23y + 6
3. 8x2 − 5x + 2
4. 15a2 + 8a
5. 11x2 + 2x + 3
6. a + 1
7. 1
8. 4x2 + 16x − 9
9. 24y − 3
10. −4a2 − 2a − 9
11. y − 2
12. −3x + 13
13. 3a + 2
14. 3x2 + x + 2
15. 10y + 7
16. 2x2 + 3x + 13
17. 2g + 1
18. a2 − 10a + 2

19. −16
20. 20x2 − 5x + 1
21. A. x2y + 4xy Identify, group, and combine like terms:
(2xy + 3xy2 − 4x2y) + (5x2y − 3xy2 + 2xy)
= 2xy + 2xy − 4x2y + 5x2y +
3xy2 − 3xy2
= 4xy + x2y
22. C. 2x2 + x + 3 Distribute the negative sign to everything in the second
polynomial. Then group and combine like terms:
(5x2 − 2x + 1) − (3x2 − 3x − 2)
= 5x2 − 2x + 1 − 3x2 + 3x + 2
= 5x2 − 3x2 − 2x + 3x + 1 + 2
= 2x2 + x + 3
Practice 10.2, page 343
1. a2 + 5a + 4b2
2. −4x − xy + y + 16
3. yz2 − 4z2 + 7yz + 5
4. 7ab − b + c − 17
5. −4a4 − c2 + 3ac + 5
6. 22xyz + x + 6
7. 7ef + ef 2 + f − 10
8. 4pq − 2q + 4
9. 4ab
10. 0
11. 3p6 + 4pq − p2 − q2
12. x + y + 15
13. 2bc − b

14. 10xyz − 8y + 16
15. 6a + 4b + d
16. 7pq − q
17. −7ab + 2b + 12
18. 0
19. −2p2 + 5q2 + 7
20. x4 + z4 − z5
21. bc2 − bc + 2c
22. −3xy + xz − 2xyz
23. c3d7 − c2 + 2d
24. ef 2g − ef 2 − 2fg + 8
25. D. 3x − y Distribute the negative sign. Then identify, group, and combine
like terms:
(x + y + z) − (−2x + 2y + z)
= x + y + z + 2x − 2y − z
= x + 2x + y − 2y + z − z
= 3x − y
26. B. 3g2 + 5h − 2k Identify, group, and combine like terms:
(2g2 + 3h − 5k) + (g2 + 2h + 3k)
= 2g2 + g2 + 3h + 2h − 5k + 3k
= 3g2 + 5h − 2k

Lesson 11: Multiply Polynomials
Practice 11, page 345
1. 30x2
2. 6xy2
3. 28ab2c2

4. 12yz
5. 9abc
6. 10x2y3z5
7. 4ab2c2
8. 34f 3gh7
9. 18xyz2 + 12z3
10. 42x2 − 36xz
11. −15ab2 − 55abc
12. −18f3h + 24f 4gh2
13. 70x7z − 50z2
14. z2 + 6xyz
15. 72ab2 + 64ab
16. 18x4 − 27xy2
17. x2 − x − 30
18. x2 + 2xy + y2
19. z2 − 81
20. y2z4 − 2xyz2 − 3x2
21. 9x2 + 24x + 15
22. x2 − y2
23. y6 − 6y4 + 10y2 − 60
24. a2b2 − ab − 12
25. A. 12a5b2c The coefficients of each term are 4 and 3, so the coefficient of
their product is 12. The product of a3 and a2 is a5. Only choice (A)
contains both of these elements.
26. D. 12p3c3 You need the product of 2pc2 and 6p2c, which can be calculated
as (2pc2)(6p2c). The product of the coefficients 2 and 6 is 12, the product

of p and p2 is p3, and the product of c and c2 is c3. Only choice (D) has all
three of these elements.
27. B. 12a2b2 − 22ab − 14 Use FOIL:
(4ab × 3ab) + (4ab × [−7]) + (2 × 3ab) + (2 × [−7])
= 12a2b2 − 28ab + 6ab − 14
= 12a2b2 − 22ab − 14

Lesson 12: Divide Polynomials
Practice 12, page 347
1. y + 15
2. x + 3
3. x + 5
4. a + b
5. x2 + 2x
6. 2x2 + 3x + 1
7. x + 2y
8. 3a + 2b
9.
10.
11.
12.
13. 6x + 2
14. 5x + 3
15. 8y + 2
16. 6y + 7
17. 2y + 2

18. 3
19. x − 6
20. y + 7
21. z − 5
22. 2x + 6
23. x − 6
24. a + 3
25. C. 3a + 2b Break the fraction up into two separate fractions:

Then divide each numerator by 7 to get 3a + 2b.
26. D. 9x + 17y + 20z The average of a set of terms is equal to the sum of
terms divided by the number of terms in the set. In this case, that can be
represented by the expression

Break this up into three separate fractions:

Then divide each numerator by 3 to get 9x + 17y + 20z.
27. A. z − 5 Distribute the 2 across the terms in the parentheses. Simplify the
numerator. Then break the given expression into separate fractions:

28. B. a ≤ 0 To be undefined, the denominator of the expression must equal 0.

When a = 0, a ×|a|+ a2 = 0. When a < 0, a × |a|+ a2 = 0. To check this
statement, pick a number for a, such as a = –2:
sa ×|a|+ a2
= –2 ×|–2|+ (–2)2
= –2 × 2 + 4
=–4+4
=0
Algebra Basics, Expressions, and Polynomials Practice Questions, pages
348−351
1. D. −4x − 6
2. C. 3d − 75 Since Heidi makes 75 less than 3 times Kris’s wage, multiply
Kris’s wage, d, by 3 and subtract 75 to get 3d − 75.
3. B. 1.26× 108 Calculate: 700 × 180,000 = 126,000,000. Scientific notation
reduces to a single digit in front of the decimal, and to do this requires
moving up 8 digits, so it would be 1.26 × 108.
4. D. 84x2y Total desks = schools × rooms per school × desks per room. 4x ×
3y × 7x = (4)(3)(7)(x)(x)(y) = 84x2y.
5. C. (x + 5)(x − 5) Multiply the monomials and polynomials in the answer
choices until you find an answer choice that results in the expression in the
question stem. For answer choice (C), use FOIL: (x + 5)(x − 5) = x2 − 5x +
5x − 25 = x2 − 25.
6. D . 18x + 2y + 13 Tom has 9x, Adam 9x + 13, and Dave 2y: 9x + (9x + 13)
+ 2y = 18x + 2y + 13.
7. B. 60y The diagram shows multiplication problems done using a table, so
the horizontal number times the vertical number will yield the value in the
table. The table tells you that a = yc and b = 5 × 3 = 15. So ab = 15yc.
Now look for a value for c. Since 20 = 5c, c must equal 4, and you have ab
= (15)(4)y = 60y. There is not enough information to deduce the value of
y, but since y appears in all the answer choices, you do not need to try to
find its value.
8. D. yThe diagram shows multiplication problems done using a table, so the

horizontal number times the vertical number will yield the value in the
table. d = 3y and a = 4y so a − d = 4y − 3y = y.
9. A. 7a2c2 + 35bc2 + 49c4 Multiply each term by 7c2:
7c2(a2) + 7c2(5b) + 7c2(7c2)
= 7a2c2 + 35bc2 + 49c4
To figure out the individual pie cost, divide $900 by the number

10. D.
of pies,
11. A.

Cancel out 6b in the numerator and 2(3b) (which equals 6b) in

the denominator. Then, one (a − 4) will cancel, leaving
12. C.

To find the total cost, multiply ounces per guest by the number of

guests by the cost per ounce. Since $z is the cost per pound, the result
needs to be divided by 16:
13. B. −26 Substituting −2 for x and 5 for y leads to 6(−2 − 5) −8(−2) = 6(−7)
− (−16) = −42 + 16 = −26.
14. A. −88 Substituting 2 for x, 4 for y, and 3 for z leads to a product of [22 +
6(3)] × [2(4) − 4(3)] = (4 + 18) × (8 − 12) = 22 × −4 = −88.
15.

Calculate:

16. D. 30kp + 20p2 + 45hp Because 5p is paid to every member, each number
of team members would be multiplied by 5p, and the team totals would be
added: 5p(6k) + 5p(4p) + 5p(9h) = 30kp + 20p2 + 45hp
17. C. −x + 9y − 10xy Simplify: 7x − [(5y)2x − 9y + 8x] = 7x − [10xy − 9y +
8x] = 7x − 10xy + 9y − 8x = −x − 10xy + 9y.
18. A. 20cd − 75c Alyshia has 4d − 15 DVDs. Multiply 5c by Alyshia’s DVD
total: (4d − 15): 5c (4d − 15) = 5c(4d) − (5c)(15) = 20cd − 75c

19. A. 8x2 + 7xy3 − 12x − 1 Factor out

= 8x2 + 7xy3 − 12x − 1
20. B. 16d − 4a The amount 80d is needed. Anything earned at the ball will be
subtracted, and 64d and 4a were both earned: 80d − 64d − 4a = 16d − 4a
left to raise.
21. A.

22. B.

Split the fraction:

The total of the three groups (12k + 8f + 6r) should be

divided by the number of squads, 2r:

23. A. 4x + 2 Substitute 2 for q and 4 for r in the expression:

24. C.
out 11x2:

Split the fractions and then simplify by factoring

25. A. 5xy3 − 16x2y2 + 42x2y Distribute:
(6x2 + 5xy2)(y) − (4xy − 9x)(4xy)
= 6x2(y) + 5xy2(y) − (4xy(4xy) − 9x(4xy))
= 6x2y + 5xy3 − (16x2y2 − 36x2y)
= 42x2y + 5xy3 − 16x2y2
26. D. 20x2 − 39x + 18 The question states that the average salary of the nonmanagerial employees is (5x − 6). That means that

The question also states that the number of non-managers in the office is
4x − 3. So,

Then (5x − 6)(4x − 3) = total of non − managers' salaries = 20x2 − 39x +
18
27. B. 51 Factor before substituting.

Substitute 6 for x and 3 for y: 5(6) + 7(3) = 30 + 21 = 51.
28. D. x − 1 Split the fraction:

= 3x − 2x − 1 = x − 1.
29. D. 3h2 + 4hk − 51h − 68k Add the populations of both countries (3h + 4k)

and multiply by the rice consumption: (h − 17):
(3h + 4k)(h − 17)
= (3h)(h) + (3h)(−17) + (4k)(h) + (4k)(−17)
= 3h2 − 51h + 4hk − 68k.
30. A. 2x2 + 2y2 − xy Split the fraction:

31. A. 2 The diagram shows multiplication problems done using a table, so the
horizontal number times the vertical number will yield the value in the
table. To figure out a, first look at the top right term. Since 5 × a = ab, b =
5. Another term with only a and b is the bottom middle, 4 × ab = 40.
Substituting 5 for b shows that 20a = 40, so a = 2.
32. B. 40 The table tells you that a2 × c = 8b. Use the table to find a value for
b. Since the top right cell of the table shows that 5 × a = ab, b must equal
5, and 8b = 40.
Equations, Inequalities, and Functions

Lesson 1: Equations
Practice 1.1, page 353
1. x = 9
2. m = 28
3. y = −1
4. x = −64
5. a = 125
6. y = −13

7. x = 27
8. c = 7
9. x = −4
10. b = −7
11. x = 31
12. s = −8
13. x = 108
14. t = 39
15. x = 48
16. y = −3
17. r = 110
18. x = 5
19. y = −9
20. d = −25
21. x = 4
22. x = −6
23. h = 26
24. x = 66
25. m = −10
26. y = 9
27. w = −28
28. y = 72
29. C. x + 36 = 77 Erin’s hours (x) plus Kayla’s hours (36) = 77 hours.
30. C. 2y = 38 Erin worked twice as many hours as Kayla (2y), and Erin
worked 38 hours, so 2y = 38.
31. C. 128 A number (x) divided by 4 is 32. Solve for x:

32. D. 12x = −60 Try −5 for x in each equation. Only choice (D) is true when
−5 is substituted for x.
12x = − 60
12(−5) = − 60
− 60 = − 60
33. B. $572.18 − c = $434.68 When you subtract the check from the amount
in the checking account, the result will be the current balance.
Practice 1.2, page 355
1. x = 50
2. y = −2
3. m = 2
4. x = −4
5. y = 6
6. z = 2
7. m = 3
8. x = 4
9. p = 7
10. s = −2
11. x = 6
12. r = −5
13. y = 11
14. b = 4
15. x = −1
16. h = 20
17. x = 9
18. z = 4
19. b = 3

20. n = 7
21. D. 3x + 9 = 6x − 15 “Three times a number” is 3x and “increased by 9”
means to add 9. “Six times the number” is 6x, and “15 less than” means to
subtract 15. The word “is” shows that the two expressions should be
connected by the = symbol.
22. D. 375 Solve:
3x + x = 500
4x = 500
x = 125
The variable x is the number of cards that Travis has. Eric has 3x, or 3 ×
125, which equals 375.
23. A.

Remember that differences and quotients must be

written in the order stated in the problem. The difference of four times a
number and 7 is 4x −7. The quotient of the number and 3 plus 15 is

24. A. $54 Solve:
x + (2x + 12) = $174
3x + 12 = $174
3x = $162
x = $54

Lesson 2: Equation Word Problems
Practice 2, page 357
1. 1800 sq. ft. Let the square footage of the first house be h, and the second
house’s square footage will then be (2h − 1000). Then write an equation
that combines both houses. The equation is h + (2h − 1000) = 4400. Solve
for h.
2. 10 dimes Let x equal the number of dimes in Julia’s pocket. The equation
is 0.10x + 0.25(24 − x) = 4.50.
3. 24 games Let w represent the number of wins, and then the number of
losses will be half of w. Write an equation

3w = 72
w = 24
Alternatively, you could solve the equation by calculating the number of
losses. Let l = losses. Wins will be twice that much. Then the equation
would read l + 2l = 36. Once you find l, remember to multiply it by two to
find the number of wins.
4. 54 The equation is x + (x + 2) + (x + 4) + (x + 6) = 4x + 12 = 212. Solve for
x + 4, the third number.
5. 8 shirts Let s represent the number of shirts Brenda bought, and then the
number of pants she bought will be equal to 13 − s. Then, write an
equation using the dollar amount she spent: $6(13 − s) + $4s = $62. Solve
for s.
6. 59 Let x equal the smallest of the three consecutive numbers. Then: x + (x
+ 1) + (x + 2) = 180. Solve for x.
7. $1100 Andrew spends twice as much on rent, which means he spends half
as much as his rent on food. The equation is
Solve for r.
8. 28 hours Let h represent the time he spends helping customers, and then
stocking shelves will be one-fourth of h. Write an equation:

5h = 140
h = 28
9. C. 84 Let w = Wiley’s points, w + 10 = Sylvia’s points, and w – 6 = Greg’s
points. Write and solve an equation:

w + w + 10 + w − 6 = 226
3w + 4 = 226
3w = 222
w = 74
Wiley scored 74 points, so Sylvia scored 74 + 10 = 84 points.
10. B. $12 Let a = the price of an adult’s ticket and a – $6 = the price of a
child’s ticket. The question states that the cost of 2 adults’ tickets and 4
children’s tickets is $48. Write and solve an equation:
2a + 4(a − 6) = 48
2a + 4a − 24 = 48
6a − 24 = 48
6a = 72
a = 12
11. B. 6 You know that in 12 years, Jenny will be twice as old as Tina.
Therefore, if you multiply Tina’s age in 12 years by 2, it will equal
Jenny’s age in 12 years. Write and solve an equation:
4x + 12 = 2(x + 12)
4x + 12 = 2x + 24
2x = 12
x=6

Lesson 3: Inequalities
Practice 3, page 359
1. x > 4
2. x > 7
3. x ≤ −3
4. x ≤ 36
5. x < −1
6. x ≥ 5
7. x > −8

8. x > 4
9. x < −7
10. x < 2
11. x ≥ 3
12. x < 6
13. x > 2
14. x > −10
15. x ≤ 3
16. x < 21
17. x ≥ −1
18. x < 3
19. x < 7
20. x ≤ 3
21. −2 ≤ x ≤ 2
22. −20 < x < 6
23. 6 < x < 16
24. 4 ≤ x ≤ 9
25. A. s ≤ 16 The perimeter must be less than or equal to 64, so solve the
inequality: 4s ≤ 64, which leads to s ≤ 16.
26. D.

Solve the inequality:
−4x + 3 < −3x + 5
−x < 2
x > −2
To graph the solution x > −2, place an open circle at –2, because –2 is not

included in the solution. Then, extend the line to the right to include all
values greater than –2.

Lesson 4: Quadratic Equations
Practice 4, page 361
1. x2 + 6x + 8
2. x2 + 2x − 15
3. x2 + 3x − 4
4. x2 − 9x + 18
5. x2 + 6x − 16
6. 2x2 − 3x − 2
7. x2 − 14x + 45
8. 3x2 + x − 2
9. x2 + 5x − 14
10. 3x2 + 14x + 16
11. x2 − x − 30
12. x2 − 13x + 30
13. 4x2 + 6x + 2
14. x2 + 5x − 36
15. x2 − 10x + 25
For questions 16–30, the order of the factors does not matter: (2x − 1)
(x + 3) = (x + 3)(2x − 1)
16. (x + 1)(x + 3)
17. (x − 1)(x + 5)
18. (x + 2)(x + 6)
19. (x − 3)(x + 2)
20. (x − 2)(x + 7)

21. (x − 4)(x + 3)
22. (x − 5)(x + 7)
23. (x − 6)(x − 6)
24. (x − 7)(x + 1)
25. (x − 4)(x + 8)
26. (2x − 1)(x + 3)
27. (2x − 10)(x + 1) or (2x + 2)(x − 5) or (2)(x − 5)(x + 1)
28. (x − 5)(x + 10)
29. (2x − 1)(2x + 3)
30. (x − 7)(x + 8)
31. A. –4 and 5 Get 0 on one side of the equation: x2 − x − 20 = 0. Then,
factor: (x + 4)(x − 5) = 0. Determine which values of x will make each
factor equal to 0. The solutions 5 and –4 will make the equation true.
32. D. 2x2 + 2x − 24 = 0 Substitute −4 for x in the answer choices. Only
choice (D) works.
2(−4)2 + 2(−4) − 24
= 2(16) + (−8) −24
= 32 − 32 = 0
33. B. 6 Substitute the answer choices for x in the equation. Only choice (B)
makes the equation true: 2(6)2 − 7(6) − 30 = 2(36) − 42 − 30 = 72 − 72 =
0. You can also factor the original equation: (x − 6)(2x + 5), so x = 6 or
34. B. x − 10 You know that length × width = area. You need to factor the
expression 2x2 − 27x + 70, and you know that one of the factors is the
length, (2x – 7). So 2x2 − 27x + 70 = (2x − 7)(x − 10). The width is (x –
10).

Lesson 5: Algebra Problem Solving
Practice 5, page 363

1. C. 24 Take each answer choice and divide it by 2. Then, check to see if the
resulting number is 12 less than the answer choice. For example, choice
(A): 12: 12 ÷ 2 = 6. And 6 is not 12 less than 12. Thus, choice (A) is
incorrect. Only choice (C) works: 24 ÷ 2 = 24 − 12.
2. C. $200 Try each number. Choice (A) says Barbara raised $150. If she did,
Sandra would have raised $450, and Matt would have raised $100. Also,
the three of them together would have raised $150 + $450 + $100 ≠ $950.
Since those numbers don’t total to $950, choice (A) must be incorrect.
Only choice (C) works: $200 + $600 + $150 = $950.
3. C. 5 The answer choices represent possible weights for the first package.
Try choice (A): if the first package weighs 2, the second package would
weigh 1, and the third package would weigh 3. Add them together to see if
they total 15: 2 + 1 + 3 ≠ 15. So choice (A) is incorrect. Only choice (C)
works: 5 + 2.5 + 7.5 = 15.
4. B. 82 The answer choices represent possible scores for the first test. If
choice (A) 76 is Hannah’s score on the first test, then her score on the
second test would be 82, and 76 + 82 ≠ 170. Only choice (B) works: 82 +
88 = 170.
5. B. 10 The answer choices represent how old Nelson might have been six
years ago. If choice (A) were correct, then Nelson would have been 5 six
years ago, and he would be 11 now. Also, six years ago Maria would have
been 1 year old, and today she would be 7. Now, the question is, is
Nelson’s current age twice Maria’s age? 11 ≠ 2 × 7. So choice (A) is
incorrect. Choice (B) does work: if Nelson was 10 six years ago, then
Maria would have been 2. Today Nelson would be 16 and Maria would be
8, and 16 is two times 8.
6. A. −3 To solve by guessing, plug each answer choice into the equation.
Try choice (A):
2(−3)2 + (−3) − 15 = 0.
2(9) − 18 = 0.
18 − 18 = 0.
7. B. 6 If the group purchased 5 children’s passes, as choice (A) suggests,
then they would have purchased 15 adults' passes. Multiply each amount
by the cost of that type of ticket, to see if the total equals $440: (5 × $15) +

(15 × $25) = $450. Thus, choice (A) is incorrect. Choice (B) works: (6 ×
$15) + (14 × $25) = $440.
8. B. 20 The answer choices represent possible values for the width. If choice
(A) were correct, then the width would be 15 and the length would be 30.
Add to find out whether choice (A) would give the value of 120 for the
perimeter: 15 + 15 + 30 + 30 = 90. Thus, choice (A) is incorrect. Choice
(B) works: 20 + 20 + 40 + 40 = 120.

Lesson 6: The Coordinate Plane
Practice 6, page 365
1. (–4, 5)
2. (3, 6)
3. (0, –3)
4. (6, –7)
5. (–5, 0)
6. (–6, –4)
7. (2, 0)
8. (7, –2)
9.

10.

11. D. (–1, 0) Plot each point in the answer choices. Only choice (D) lies on
the line that passes through points A and B.
12. A. (–3, –2) Find the two points discussed in the problem. Then locate the
third corner of the triangle, and find the coordinates of the corner. The
missing corner is 3 spaces to the left of the origin and 2 spaces down: (–3,
–2).

Lesson 7: Graphing a Line
Practice 7, page 367
1.
If x =

Then y =

–2

2

0

3

2

4

2.
If x =

then y =

–1

2

0

–1

1

–4

3.
If x =

then y =

1

1

2

0

3

–1

4.
If x =

then y =

0

3

1

1

2

–1

5. C. point T and (0, 0) Try the coordinates for points S and T in the
equation. Both lie on the graph of the equation. Check the remaining
points in the answer choices. Only (0, 0) will make the equation
true.
6. D. y = −4x − 2 Choose two points on line P. The easiest points to work
with are the ones represented by dots: (–1, 2) and (0, –2). Try one of those
points in the equations. If the point works in the equation, try the other
point as well. (You must try both because any number of lines may pass
through a single point. To establish that the equation represents line P, it
must fit both points.) Both points work only in choice (D): y = −4x − 2.
7. B. 2x + 3y =9 Try the coordinates (–3, 5) in each equation. Only choice (B)
is true.
2x + 3y = 9
2(−3) + 3(5) = 9
−6 + 15 = 9
9=9

Lesson 8: Slope of a Line

Practice 8, page 369
1. 1
2. –2
3. 0
4.
5.
6. 0
7.
8. 2
9. –3
10. A. line A Of the answer choices, only line A has a negative slope, so it
must be the correct answer. Line A moves down 1 space each time it goes
3 spaces to the right, a ratio of –1 to 3 or
11. B. –2 You have more information than you need. Choose any two points
and use the slope formula to solve for the slope. For example, if you
choose points (0, 4) and (1, 2), your calculations would be:

12. C. (2, 3) The best way to solve the problem is probably to make a quick
sketch. Because the line has a slope of 3, start at point (1, 0) and count 3
spaces up and 1 space to the right. You are now at point (2, 3), which is
choice (C). You can check your work using the slope formula.

Lesson 9: Slope and Equations
Practice 9.1, page 371
1. y = −4x + 2
x = 1; y = −2; m = −4
−2 = −4(1) + b
b=2

2. y = 2x − 2
x = −1; y = −4; m = 2
−4 = 2(−1) + b
b = −2
3.

4. y – 1 = 3(x – 2)
x1 = 2; y1 = 1; m = 3
5.

6. y + 2 = x – 1
x1 = 1; y1 = –2; m = 1
7.
First, find the slope:

Choose either ordered pair to substitute for x and y:
Follow the steps to find the equation of a line in the slope-intercept form.

8. y = 4x + 12

9.

10. C. y = –x – 1 Plug both points into the slope formula.
.
Then, use m and one of the points to solve for b.
0 = –1(–1) + b
b = –1
11. B. y = 4 Plug both points into the slope formula.

0. Then,

use m and one of the points to solve for b.
4 = –3(0) + b
b=4
Because this line has a slope of zero, there is no x term in the equation.
Rather, y is always equal to 4, no matter what the value of x is.
12. D.
To answer this question, simplify the equation in the question
to find an answer that matches:

13. B. y = –x – 4 Because the line on the graph slopes down from left to right,
its slope is negative, so you can eliminate choices (A) and (C)
immediately. Then note that the line crosses the y-axis at (0, –4), so the y-

intercept is –4. Therefore, the correct choice is (B).
Practice 9.2, page 374
1. 1.5 lb per person Use the slope formula,

. Note

that you can reasonably assume that for an order of 0 people, there will be
0 pounds of clams, so it’s possible to answer this rate question with just
one additional point, either (100, 150) or (20, 30).
.

2. 0.05 gallons per square yard

3. 0.8 units of y per unit of x Any two of the points can be used here. Using
the first two points,
4.

5.

.

6. C. 18.25 calls per hr Use the points (0, 0) and (4, 73). So
.
7. A. 0.0125 hr per sq yd You can use any two points to determine the rate.
Note that the installer is interested in time per square yard, not square
yards per unit of time. While time is frequently the independent variable,
in this case time per square yard is more useful because once she
determines the time needed per square yard, she can multiply it by her
desired hourly rate to determine the rate she should charge customers, in
terms of dollars per square yard.

Lesson 10: Systems of Linear Equations
Practice 10, page 377
1. (7, 6)

2. (–3, 11)

3. (3, –1)
Isolate y:
−y = −7x + 22
y = 7x − 22
Substitute:

Substitute back:
y = 7(3) – 22
y = −1
4. (7, 2)
Isolate y:
y=9−x
Substitute:

Substitute back:
y=9−7
y=2
5. (–4, 3)
y is already isolated.
y = 3x + 15
Substitute:

Substitute back:
y = 3(−4) + 15
y=3
6.
y is already isolated.
y = 12x
Substitute:
10x − (12x) = −1
–2x = −1

Substitute back:

7. A. (2, –1) Isolate x in the first equation. x = 2y + 4. Then, substitute into
the second equation to find a value for y.

Finally, use that value of y in the first equation to find a value for x. x =
2(−1) + 4 = 2
8. C. (0, 0) The equation y = x represents a line whose x-coordinate is always
equal to the y-coordinate. The equation y = −x represents a line whose ycoordinate is always equal to the negative of the x-coordinate. Neither line
has a b term in its equation, so both lines have a y-intercept of zero,
meaning that they both cross the y-axis at (0, 0).
9. C.
Since the only possible y-value for the line y = –2 is –2,
simply substitute that value for y in the equation 3y = 2x + 3 to find the
intersection:

10. C. y = –4x + 2 Two different lines cannot intersect if they are parallel.
Lines are parallel if they have the same slope. Only choice (C) does not
have a slope of 4, so this is the correct choice.

Lesson 11: Patterns and Functions
Practice 11, page 379
1. 0
2. 41
3. 2
4. 40
5. 23
6. –4
7. 31.25
8. –13

9. 32
10. –5
11. B. 49 To highlight the pattern, it might be useful to make a table or list:
1st

2nd

3rd

4th

1 block

3 blocks

5 blocks

7 blocks

The number of blocks in each construction equals 2n – 1, where n is the
number in the sequence. The 25th construction would require 2(25) – 1 =
49 blocks.
12. C. 16 Each term is 6 greater than the term before it. The next (that is, the
fifth) term in the sequence is 10, and the sixth term is 16.
13. B. c = $5.00 – $0.25(n − 1) The original price per scarf ($5) is reduced by
25 cents starting with the second scarf.
14. B. 1, 5, 9, 13, 17 . . . Try the numbers 1, 2, and 3 for x in the function. This
will result in the first three terms of the pattern: 1, 5, and 9. Only choice
(B) contains these three terms.

Lesson 12: Function Applications
Practice 12, page 381
1. a. $99
b. $265
2. a. 5.5 hours
b. 4.25 hours
3. a. Plan A
b. Plan B
4. B. $29.50 Use the functions for the two jobs, substituting 30 hours for h:
Job 1: P = $9.75h = $9.75(30) = $292.50
Job 2: P = $70 + $8.40h = $70 + $8.40(30) = $70 + $252 = $322
Subtract: $322 – $292.50 = $29.50

5. D. Alicia will earn the most at Job 2. Use the functions to find Alicia’s
wages at all three jobs based on 40 hours:
Job 1: P = $9.75h = $9.75(40) = $390
Job 2: P = $70 + $8.40h = $70 + $8.40(40) = $70 + $336 = $406
Job 3:
Compare the three results. Alicia will earn the most at Job 2.
6. B. $19,400 Use the function to calculate the profit:
P = $95,000 – $5,400d
P = $95,000 – $5,400(14)
P = $95,000 – $75,600
P = $19,400

Lesson 13: Function Notation
Practice 13, page 383
1. Domain is all real numbers; range is all real numbers.
2. Domain is all real numbers except x = –3; range is all real numbers except
0.
3. Domain is all real numbers; range is f(x) ≥ 0.
4. Domain is all real numbers; range is f(b) ≤ 0.
5. Domain is all real numbers; range is f(x) ≤ 1.
. Domain is all z except 3; range is all

6.

real numbers except 1. Graphing this function helps make its behavior,
and thus its domain and range, clear. You might also pick some numbers
and realize that when z > 3, as z gets bigger, the ratio of z + 3 to z – 3 gets
closer to 1 but never equals 1. The same thing happens when z < 3 and z
gets smaller.
7. B. f(w) = 2w
8. A. Domain is 0 ≤ h ≤ 8; range is 100 ≤ f(h) ≤ 580. The function that
represents their daily driving is f(h) = 100 + 60h. h is an amount of time,

so it cannot be negative—the least amount of time they can spend on the
road after breakfast is 0 hours. The question states they never spend more
than 8 hours on the road after breakfast. Therefore, the domain is 0 ≤ h ≤
8. When they drive the least amount of time, they go the fewest miles, so
when h = 0, f(h) = 100. When they drive as long as possible, they go the
most miles, so when h = 8,
f(h) = 100 + 60 × 8 = 580. Thus, the range is 100 ≤ f(h) ≤ 580.
Equations, Inequalities, and Functions Practice Questions, pages 384–
387
1. D. –4x – 6 Use the order of operations: 6 – 4 (x + 3) = 6 – 4x – 12 = –4x –
6
2. A. –3

3. B. y = –4x + 6 Choices (A) and (B) are the only two choices with the
correct slope. Plug in x = 1 and y = 2 into both equations; only choice (B)
works.
4. C. 4x – y = –7 Try x = –2 and y = –1 in each equation. Only choice (C) is
true: 4(–2) – (–1) = –8 + 1 = –7
5. C. $510 Let t = Tom’s earnings and 2t – $150 = Jan’s earnings.

6. D. D The coordinates of D are (–3, –2), which make the equation y = – x –
5 true.

7. C.

Count the rise and run from C to B. The line moves up 3 spaces as it

moves 9 to the right:

.

8. A. s ≥ $17,500 Samuel’s earnings can be represented by the expression
$350 + 0.1s, where s represents total sales for the month. Since Samuel

needs to earn at least $2,100, this expression must be greater than or equal
to $2,100. Solve:

9. B. $5.35 Substitute 24 for n and solve:

10. D. 29 Let x = the first number. The remaining numbers are x + 2, x + 4,
and x + 6. Solve:

The numbers are 23, 25, 27, and 29. The problem asks for the largest of
these numbers.
11. C. 36 Calculate: 3 × 3 × 3 × 3 × 3 × 3 = 729. The other expressions are
less than 400. You could also use estimation to help with this problem. For
example, to evaluate choice (A), remember that 7 × 7 = 49. Then, since 49
is almost 50, round up to make the calculation easier: 7 × 50 = 350. So 73
< 350, and it is definitely less than 400.
12. B. 5x – 4 = 8 + 2 + 3x Translate each part of the problem to numbers and
symbols and then connect the parts with the = symbol.
13. B. 1 To find the slope of a line that crosses two points, find the difference
between the y-coordinates and then divide by the difference in the xcoordinates:

.

14. B. 31 From 1 to 7, there is a difference of 6. From 7 to 14, there is a
difference of 7. From 14 to 22, there is a difference of 8. To find the next
term, add 9 to 22: 22 + 9 = 31.
15. C. 0 To find the y-intercept of a line when given the slope and a point,
plug the x- and y-coordinates and the slope into the slope-intercept form, y
= mx + b. This results in 2 = 2(1) + b. Solve for b.
16. (–2, 1)

Create tables for each linear equation to find values of y when substituting
values for x:

Graph the two lines. They intersect at point (–2, 1).
17. A. –7x – (8 + y) The word product indicates multiplication, and the word
sum indicates addition. Choice (B) means that y is added, rather than
subtracted, from the product (due to order of operations), so it is incorrect.
18. C. 8 and –3 Either solve by factoring or by trying each option in the
equation. The correct factorization is as follows:

19. B. 4 Cynthia’s age right now is six times Rebecca’s, or 6r. Thus, in six
years, Cynthia will be 6r + 6 years old, and Rebecca will be r + 6 years
old. Write an equation and solve for r: 6r + 6 = 3(r + 6).

20. B. y = 2x – 3 Try the given points in the equations in the answer options.
Only choice (B) works with both points.
21. B.
–2 (x – 6) > 8
–2x + 12 > 8
–2x > –4
x<2

Remember to reverse the inequality symbol when you divide both sides by
a negative number.
22. B. (−5, 1) Point L is 5 spaces to the left of the origin along the x-axis and 1
space above the origin along the y-axis.
23. D. The coordinates of point L are (–5, 1), and the coordinates of point
M are (–3, 4). Find the slope by finding the difference of the ycoordinates, and divide by the difference of the x-coordinates:
.
24. C. $18 Let s = Sam’s gift. Then:
Daniel’s gift = s.
Celia’s gift = s + 12 (since Sam and Daniel gave the same amount).
Bob’s gift = 0.5(s + 12) (that is, one-half of Celia’s gift).
Add those four quantities together and set the sum total to $81:

25. A. x ≤ 3 Remember to reverse the inequality sign when dividing by a
negative number:
–7x – 4 ≥ x – 28
–8x ≥ –24
x≤3

26. C. y = x + 2 Start by finding the slope:

. Now you know that the

equation will be y = x + b, and you can eliminate choices (A) and (B). And
in this case, no calculations are required to find the y-intercept, because
one of the points given in the question is (0, 2)—the point where the line
crosses the y-axis.
27. B. 8,652 Let x = votes for the leading candidate and p = votes for Perez.
Write an equation:
.
Additionally, you can say that p + x = 18,072, or p = 18,072 – x Substitute
for p:

That number represents the number of votes the opposing candidate
received. Now, substitute that value back into the simpler of the two
original equations:
28. B. x = – 2 Simplify:

29. D. $5x + $10(35 – x) = $240 The total value of the $5 bills is $5x. Since
there are 35 bills, the number of $10 bills must be 35 – x. The value of the
$10 bills is $10(35 – x). The sum of the value of the $5 bills plus the value
of the $10 bills is $240.
30. C. 75 Let x = the first number in the sequence. Then write an equation:

The first number in the sequence is 72. That means the fourth number
(which equals x + 3) is 75.

31. 4 Substitute and solve:

.

32. (–1, 1) The given points lie in a vertical line. Since the distance between
the points is 8 spaces, the midpoint is (–1, 1), which is 4 spaces from
either point.
Geometry

Lesson 1: Plane Figures
Practice 1, page 389
1. rectangle, square
2. parallelogram, rectangle, square, rhombus
3. trapezoid
4. rectangle, square
5. none
6. rectangle, square, parallelogram, rhombus
7. square, rhombus
8. rectangle, square, parallelogram, rhombus, trapezoid
9. trapezoid
10. square
11. C. 140° Let h = the measure of ∠H. Then 3h + 20° = m∠F. The sum of
the angles of a quadrilateral is 360°, so 3h + 20° + h + 90° + 90° = 360°
Solve the equation:
4h + 200° = 360°, so 4h = 160°, h = 40°, and 3h + 20° = 140°.
12. B. EF ∣∣ GH In other words, line EF is parallel to line GH. A trapezoid is
a quadrilateral with exactly one pair of parallel sides.
13. C. 90° If the opposite sides of a figure are parallel and all four sides are
equal, then the figure is either a square or rhombus. Since ∠T is a right
angle, the figure is square. Therefore, all the angles measure 90°.
14. C. parallelogram This quadrilateral has opposite sides that are equal and

opposite angles that are equal. It has no right angles, and the two sets of
sides are different lengths. The quadrilateral must be a parallelogram.

Lesson 2: Triangles
Practice 2, page 391
1. equilateral, acute
2. scalene, obtuse
3. isosceles, acute
4. 64°
5. 45°
6. 97°
7. C. 14 Solve for ∠BAC: m∠BAC + 55° = 115°, so m∠BAC = 60°. Solve
for ∠BCA: ∠BCA + 35° = 95°, so ∠BCA = 60°. If two of the angles of
∆ABC each measure 60°, the third angle also measures 60°. The triangle is
equilateral, and all the sides of ABC are equal to side AB.
8. C. right 55° + 35° + m∠D = 180°. Solve for the missing angle:
m∠D = 90°. Therefore, the triangle is a right triangle.
9. C. 86° The angles of a triangle add up to 180°. 38° + 56° = 94°, so the
third angle can be found by subtracting 94° from 180°: 180° – 94° = 86°.

Lesson 3: Pythagorean Relationship
Practice 3, page 393
1. c = 11.3 in
2. c = 15 yd
3. c = 2.5 cm
4. a = 5.2 m
5. b = 8 mm
6. a = 17.3 ft
7. c = 12.2 cm

8. b = 26.0 in
8. b = 26.0 in
9. c = 6.4 km
10. B. 6.7 The distance from A to C is 3 units, and the distance from B to C is
6 units.

11. C. 30 The shorter sides are the legs. Solve for the hypotenuse:

12. D. 12.1 The brace divides the rectangle into two right triangles with the
brace as the hypotenuse of each. Solve for the hypotenuse of one of the
triangles:

, which rounds to 12.1.

13. A. 36 Calculate:

Lesson 4: Perimeter and Area
Practice 4, page 395
1. area: 39 sq units
perimeter: 30.8 units
2. area: 16 sq units
perimeter: 16 units
3. area: 640 sq units
perimeter: 104 units
4. area: 29.6 sq units
perimeter: 24.6 units
5. area: 616 sq units
perimeter: 109 units
6. area: 38 sq units
perimeter: 32 units
7. C. 56 The shaded portion is a trapezoid:

.

8. C. 54 The area of a rectangle is its base times its height. 9 × 6 = 54.
9. C. 324 Subtract the area of the patio from the area of the entire yard. Both
are rectangles, so multiply length and width to find the area: (24 × 18) −
(12 × 9) = 324.
10. B. 24 Add all four sides: 6 + 6 + 6 + 6 = 24 centimeters.

Lesson 5: Circles

Practice 5, page 397
1. C = 62.8 in; A = 314.2 in2
2. C = 12.6 cm; A = 12.6 cm2
3. C = 25.1 m; A = 50.2 m2
4. C. 38 Use the formula C = π d, where d = 12. 12 × 3.14 = 37.7
5. B. 3.14 × 62 The formula for the area of a circle is A = π r2. The radius of a
circle is half of the diameter. Half of 12 is 6. Substitute 6 for r and 3.14 for
π. A = 3.14 × 62.
6. B. 13.0 The diameter of a circle is twice the radius. 6.5 × 2 = 13.
7. C. 19 Find the circumference of the 10-point band. First find the diameter,
which passes through the 10-point band, the inner circle, and the 10-point
band a second time on its way from one edge of the circle to the other.
Add the width of the 10-point band twice and the diameter of the inner
circle: 2 + 2 + 2 = 6 inches. Now you can use the formula for
circumference: 6 × 3.14 = 18.84, which rounds to 19 inches.

Lesson 6: Volume
Practice 6.1, page 399
1. 160 cubic units
2. 27 cubic units
3. 141 cubic units
4. 420 cubic units
5. 3 cubic units
6. 236 cubic units
7. A. 5. V = lwh You know that the length and width of the box both equal 4
and that the volume equals 80. Solve the equation:
80 = 4 × 4 × h
80 = 16h
5=h

8. C. 125 If each edge measures 5 feet, then the figure is a cube. 53 = 125.
9. C. 17 First, you must find the volume of the pool. The radius of the pool is
6 and the height is 3.
V = π r2h
≈ 3.14 × 62 × 3
≈ 3.14 × 36 × 3
≈ 339.12
Therefore, the volume is about 339. Solve the proportion

, where

x equals the number of scoops Linda must add: 20x = 339; x = 16.95,
about 17.
Practice 6.2, page 401
1. 9 in3
2. 127 in3
3. 314 cm3
4. 480 m3
5. 11 in3
6. 1060 cm3
7. A. 480 First, find the volume of the original package. Substitute the
numbers given into the volume equation:
. Then
find the volume of the new package. Add 4 to the length and width of the
base to get 14. Substitute into the volume equation again and solve:
. Find the difference of the two volumes: 980 –
500 = 480.
8. C. 67 You know that the height of the cone is half of the diameter of the
base. Since the radius of the base is also half of the diameter, the radius
must equal the height. Therefore, the radius is 4. Now solve the equation:
9. D. The volume of B is less than the volume of A. First, find the volumes
of the two figures. Figure A is a rectangular solid. Use the formula V = lwh

= 4 × 3 × 2 = 24. Figure B is a pyramid. Use the formula
. Now compare the two volumes. Since 24 >
18, choice (D) must be the answer.
10. D. 1,000 Use the formula
1,000.

which is about

Lesson 7: Surface Area
Practice 7.1, page 403
1. 108
2. 39
3. 24
4. 336
5. 256
6. 384
7. A. 5 If all the edges are the same length, then the box must be a cube, and
each square face has the same area. There are 6 faces. Divide 150 by 6 to
get an area of 25 for each face. Then
= 5, so each side has a length of
5 in.
8. C. The surface area of Figure A is greater than the surface area of
Figure B. Calculate both surface areas. Figure A: 25 × 6 = 150. Figure B:
(30 × 4) + (9 × 2) = 138. Therefore, Figure A’s surface area is greater than
Figure B’s.
9. C. 162 The original box has a side length of 3 centimeters, so the surface
area is 54 square centimeters. When the dimensions are doubled, the new
box has a side length of 6 centimeters, so the surface area is 216 square
centimeters. The difference in surface areas is 216 cm – 54 cm, which is
162 square centimeters.
Practice 7.2, page 405
1. 168π
2. 40π

3. 36π
4. 378π
5. 400π
6. 65π
7. B. 64π The formula for the surface area of a sphere uses the radius, and the
radius is half the diameter, so 8 ÷ 2 = 4 = r. Now use the formula for the
surface area of a sphere: SA = 4π r2 =
4 × π × 42 = 64π.
8. D. The new cone will have a surface area less than the surface area of
the original cone. The original cone has a radius of 4, so its surface area
is π (4)(8) + π (42) = 32π + 16π = 48π. The new cone will have a slant
height of 16, a diameter of 4 and a radius of 2, so its surface area is: π (2)
(16) + π (22) = 32π + 4π = 36π, which is less than 48π.
9. C. 170 The surface area of the cylinder is 2π (3)(6) + 2π (32) = 36π + 18π =
54π = 54(3.14) ≈ 170 square inches.

Lesson 8: Combined Figures
Practice 8, page 407
1. P = 150 units
A = 1050 sq units
2. P = 49.7 units
A = 159.3 sq units
3. P = 72 units
A = 168 sq units
4. V = 185 cubic units
5. V = 278 cubic units
6. V = 399 cubic units
7. D. 360 Find the volume of the main rectangular slab: V = lwh, so V = 3 ×
8 × 12 = 288 cubic feet. Find the volume of one of the blocks: V = lwh, so
V = 3 × 3 × 2 = 18 cu ft. Multiply by 4, the number of blocks: 18 × 4 = 72

cu ft. Finally, add the main slab to the blocks: 288 + 72 = 360 cu ft.
8. C. 134 The radius of both the cones and the cylinder is 2. The height of
one cone is 4 inches. Find the volume of one cone:
16.7 cu in. Multiply by 2 to find the
volume of both cones: 16.7 × 2 = 33.4 cu in. Find the volume of the
cylinder: V = πr2h ≈ 3.14 × 22 × 8 ≈ 100.48 cu in. Add to find the total
volume: 33.4 + 100.48 =
133.88 cu in, which rounds to 134 cu in.

Lesson 9: Geometry Calculator Skills
Practice 9, page 409
1. 42 in
2. 195 cm2
3. 43 ft3
4. 15.8 cm
5. 37.7 in
6. 3016 cm3
7. C. 520 Use the formulas for finding the area of a rectangle and the area of
a triangle, and subtract the area of the cut-out triangle from the area of the
rectangle. On the TI-30XS MultiView™ calculator, enter the following:
. The right side of the display will read 520. You
can enter the entire calculation in this fashion because the TI-30XS™
understands the algebraic order of operations. If you press enter after each
of those operations, your answer will be incorrect.
8. B. 35 Use the formula for finding the volume of a cylinder. Press:
. The right side of the display will read 35.34291735,
which rounds to 35 cubic meters.
9. D. 5,056 Use the formula for finding the volume of a rectangular solid.
Subtract the volume of Box B from the volume of Box A. Press:
. The right side of the display will read 5056.
10. C. 608 Work carefully to make sure you find the area of the correct sides

of the boxes. The shaded sides have dimensions of
32 cm × 12 cm and 28 cm × 8 cm. To find the area of one rectangle, use
the formula for finding the area of a rectangle: A = b × h. To find the total
area, find the area of each side and add these areas together: (32 × 12) +
(28 × 8). Press:
. The right side of the display will read 608.
The total area that the advertiser will cover is 608 cm², so choice (C) is
correct.
Geometry Practice Questions,
pages 410–412
1. D. 150 If the edge length is 5 cm, then each square surface has an area of
25 cm2. There are 6 faces, so multiply by 6 to get 150 cm2.
2. C. 192π Substitute the values given in the question into the formula for the
surface area of a cylinder:
SA = 2π rh + 2πr2
SA = 2π (6)(10) + 2π (62)
SA = 120π + 72π = 192π
3. C. 66π The surface area of a cylinder is calculated with the formula SA =
2π rh + 2π r 2 = (2 × π × 3 × 8) + (2 × π × 9) = 48π + 18π = 66π.
4. C.

The surface area of a pyramid with a four-sided base is
, where p is the perimeter of the base, s is the slant height

of a face of the pyramid, and B is the area of the base. The pyramid
described in this problem has a square base with sides of length 4, so both
the perimeter (p) and the area of its base (B) are 16. Each face of the
pyramid is an equilateral triangle, the height of which represents the slant
height (s) of the pyramid. Divide one of the equilateral triangles into two
30:60:90 triangles and use the side length ratio x: x
: 2x to determine
the slant height of the pyramid. Since the base of one of these 30:60:90
triangles is 2 (half the length of a side of the pyramid’s base) and the
hypotenuse is 4 (the length of a side of the equilateral triangles making up
the faces of the pyramid), the height of each 30:60:90 triangle (and,
therefore, of each equilateral triangle face of the pyramid) is
. That is
the slant height (s) of the pyramid as well. Now, plug in all of the relevant

measures and solve:

.

5. D. 512π The circumference is 16π so the diameter is 16, and the radius is
8. The surface area is 4π r2 = 256π. The paint covers the ball twice, so
multiply by 2 to get 512π.
6. D. 224 A closet is in the shape of a rectangular solid. To find the volume,
multiply: V = lwh = 7 × 4 × 8 = 224 cubic feet.
7. C. 48π The cone has a surface area of π rs = π × 3 × 10 = 30π (don’t
include the base of the cone). A sphere with radius 3 has a surface area of
4π r2 = 4 × π × 32 = 36π. The surface area of the ice cream is half of that,
or 18π. Add to get 30π + 18π = 48π.
8. C. 8:1 The formula for the volume of a sphere is
. Find the volumes
of both spheres and simplify the ratio between those volumes. Or think
about it this way: the ratio of the volume of Sphere A to that of Sphere B
would be as follows.
Find the value of the exponents:
You know that you can simplify a ratio by dividing both sides of the ratio
by a number. Here, divide both sides by to get: 8 to 1.
9. 24 The parallelogram has an area of 60 square cm. The area of the triangle
is
, so 60 = 2.5b and b = 24.
10. A. 1,458 The height of all three boxes is 9 in, the length is 18 in, and the
width is 9 in. The total volume is 18 × 9 × 9 = 1458.
11. B. 500 Since Max hikes directly east after hiking directly due north, he has
made a 90° turn. The distances hiked therefore form a right triangle. The
legs are 300 and 400 yards. To solve for the hypotenuse, use the
Pythagorean relationship:

A quicker solution would be to notice that the distances form a large
triangle with sides in the 3:4:5 ratio. Then it is easy to see that the
hypotenuse of a triangle with legs of 300 and 400 yards is 500 yards.
12. C. 168 The volume of the container as drawn in the diagram is V = lwh = 9
in × 7 in × 12 in =
756 in3. If you increase the length by 2 inches, the volume is 11 in × 7 in ×
12 in = 924 in3. Find the difference: 924 in3 − 756 in3 = 168 in3. You can
solve the problem more easily by multiplying the added length by the
width and height: 2(7)(12) = 168.
13. D. x2 = 152 − 62 Use the Pythagorean relationship. If a2 + b2 = c2 and c is
the hypotenuse, then b2 = c2 − a2 and
x2 = 152 − 62.
14. C. 36 Use the formula for finding the perimeter of a rectangle. Let 3w =
length.
P = 2l + 2w
96 = 2(3w) + 2w
96 = 8w
w = 12
So the width is 12 inches, and the length is 3 × 12 = 36 inches.
15. D. 1920π The circumference is 16π, so r = 8 cm. A cone-shaped party hat
does not have a base, so SA = π rs = 96π. Multiply by 20 to get 1920π.
16. A. 3.43 To find the area of the shaded region, subtract the area of the
circle from the area of the square. One side of the square is equivalent to
the diameter of the circle. The radius is 2, so the diameter—and each side
of the square—is 4. So A = 42 − π × 22 ≈ 3.43.
17. B. 1,560 You may find it helpful to draw a sketch of the room. Two walls
measure 40 by 12 feet. Two measure 25 by 12 feet. Find the total area: 2 ×
40 × 12 + 2 × 25 × 12 = 960 + 600 = 1,560.
18. C. 12,000 Use the formula V = lwh. Multiply: 40 × 25 × 12 = 12,000.
19. A. 4 Begin by finding the total surface area of all three pyramids. The
formula for the surface area of a pyramid is
. For each
pyramid, plug in the values and calculate:

Top left pyramid:

Top right pyramid:

Bottom pyramid:

Thus, the total surface area for all three pyramids is:
16 + 45 + 48 = 109
The problem states that Laura needs one tube of paint for each 30 square
inches. Thus, she needs 109 ÷ 30 ≈ 3.6. In order to finish her project, she
should buy four tubes of paint.

Social Studies
Social Studies Practices

Lesson 1: Determine Central Idea and Draw Conclusions
Practice 1, page 421
1. C. the characteristics of Greek tragedy The passage describes tragedy as
“central to Greek culture” and supports this point with details about the
plots, staging, characters, and themes of Greek tragedy.
2. D. The main character in Greek drama has a tragic flaw that causes
his downfall. Choice (D) cites one of the details the author uses to try to
establish the central role of tragedy in Greek culture. The other choices are
all too broad (choice (A)) or misrepresent what the passage actually said
(choices (B) and (C)).
3. A. Ancient Greeks did not expect to see an original story each time
they attended the theater. Choice (A) is the only answer choice

supported by information in the passage. The writer tells you that tragedies
“told familiar stories from Greek myths and epics,” so it must have been
the case that theatergoers knew the general story that would be acted out.
4. D. Where do the incomes of senior citizens come from? Choice (D) is
correct because the graph tells you the sources of income for American
senior citizens. The graph doesn’t give any actual dollar amounts, nor does
it state how many senior citizens there are in the United States You would
need those numbers to answer the questions in choices (A), (B), and (C).
5. B. Social Security benefits are the most widespread means of support
for most senior citizens. Each bar in the graph represents the percentage
of all seniors who receive some of their income from that source. Since the
Social Security bar is the tallest (representing more than 86% of all
seniors), choice (B) must be true based on the graph.

Lesson 2: Interpret Words and Ideas
Practice 2, page 423
1. C. political and social instability in some Northern European countries
In the first paragraph of the passage, the author mentions “riots, civil
unrest, and open rebellion” as some of the factors that pushed German
citizens to migrate. Those events are examples of “political and social
instability,” so choice (C) is correct.
2. D. a painting of pioneers settling and farming productive prairie land
In the passage, the author discusses “abundance” in the second paragraph,
giving examples of the kinds of optimistic messages that attracted people
to the United States. The image of pioneers opening up productive
farmland is symbolic of the economic opportunity promised to 19th
century immigrants to the United States, so choice (D) is correct.
3. C. a growth in the population of the United States In the first paragraph,
the author tells you that the number of immigrants arriving in the United
States between 1820 and 1870 was greater than the entire U.S. population
just 10 years before that time period. You can conclude from the passage
that the U.S. population grew.
4. B. Internal migration led to overgrazing. According to the timeline,
aggressive agriculture occurred prior to 1930 and the “black blizzards,”

caused in part by overgrazing, began in 1931. Internal migration did not
begin until around 1933. Inferring that internal migration (which began
later) caused overgrazing (which had already occurred) would be illogical,
so choice (B) is correct.
5. C. depleted topsoil The “aggressive, mechanized farming techniques” that
depleted the topsoil in the American Midwest and Southern Plains
occurred prior to and contributed to the dust storms and “black blizzards”
that characterize the Great Dust Bowl. Internal migration (choice (B)) and
failed farms (choice (D))
were results, not causes, of the Dust Bowl.

Lesson 3: Analyze Author’s Purpose and Point of View
Practice 3, page 425
1. C. propagandistic Page 424 explains that propaganda uses emotional
language to influence readers’ behavior. Here, asking the readers to “have
a part in Victory” is just such language.
2. C. Citizens who plant war gardens help supply the war effort with
essential resources. As the passage explains, war gardens were
encouraged so that, with citizens supplying more of their own food, the
government could use its limited resources to feed and equip soldiers,
sailors, and airmen. Choice (C) paraphrases this nicely.
3. A. describe war gardens and explain their popularity in the United
States The author’s tone is neutral and explanatory; she simply wants to
explain what war gardens were and why they were popular during the two
world wars. The author is not advocating a point of view (choice (B)),
trying to compare or contrast the United States with any other country
(choice (C)), or arguing against anyone else’s position (choice (D)).
4. C. a cancer By using a frightening and often fatal disease such as “cancer”
to describe the impact of the proposed regulations, the citizen is making an
emotional comparison. The analogy is especially aggressive given that the
issue addresses health and safety.

Lesson 4: Evaluate Author’s Reasoning and Evidence
Practice 4, page 427

1. A. Damming the Mekong could solve Cambodia’s energy problems.
The author argues for cooperation among Cambodia and its neighboring
countries, all of which share the Mekong River. The reason this is
important, the author asserts, is because hydroelectric power from the
Mekong would help solve Cambodia’s energy problems. Nowhere in the
argument, however, does the author support this contention.
2. B. Strikes have a detrimental impact on workers. The cartoon shows a
laborer using a strike as a means of “cutting off” production, depicted as a
tree branch. The joke is that the worker sits on the wrong side of the
branch he’s cutting. Once the worker is successful in cutting off
production, the cartoonist implies, he will fall to the ground along with
production. Choice (B) neatly sums up the cartoonist’s point.
3. D. Ancient Greece pioneered democracy. The one reason the author
gives for believing that Ancient Greece was the greatest of the early
civilization is that it was the birthplace of democracy. Thus, choice (D) is
correct. Choice (A) is the author’s opinion, not a fact supporting that
opinion. Choices (B) and (C) are both reasons that ancient Babylon and
Egypt (and not the author’s favorite, Greece) might be considered great.
4. B. The Constitution grants more power to the federal government
than did the Articles of Confederation. In each category compared in
the chart, the federal government has more power under the Constitution
than it had under the Articles of Confederation, so choice (B) is a valid
inference, though it is not explicitly stated anywhere on the chart. All three
wrong answers cite specific facts stated in the chart.

Lesson 5: Analyze Relationships Between Materials
Practice 5.1, page 429
1. A. housing and food Study the circle graph (pie chart) to see that the two
largest portions are labeled with white (33%) and vertical lines (20%).
Checking the legend to the right shows that these “slices” correspond to
housing and food, respectively.
2. D. Brazil has a higher divorce rate than Mexico. This bar chart directly
supports choice (D): Brazil’s divorce rate is 0.6 per thousand, while
Mexico’s is 0.4 per thousand. Choice (B) is incorrect because this chart

shows five countries in the Western Hemisphere, not all of them. One of
the countries not shown on the chart may have a divorce rate even lower
than Mexico’s. Choice (C) is incorrect because this chart conveys nothing
about how divorce rates have changed over time.
3. fluctuated As you read the line graph left to right, showing the change
over time, you see that percentage of votes for third-party presidential
candidates went up and down multiple times, so “fluctuated” is accurate.
4. C. Third-party candidates have never captured more than 10 percent
of the popular vote in any presidential election. The statement in choice
(C) is disproved by 1968 (14 percent) and 1992 (more than 19 percent).
5. C. how agriculture spread in the Americas The map shows two places at
which agriculture originated independently (indicated by black stars) and
where agriculture spread out from those two points (indicated by the white
arrows). The map shows no political boundaries (choice (A)) or physical
features (choice (B)) of the Americas, nor does it claim to name all of the
ancient civilizations on the two continents (choice (D)).
6. B. Both the Andes civilization and Mesoamerica domesticated beans.
Check right below the names of the two civilizations named on the map
and you’ll find the crops they learned to grow. “Beans” is the only crop
listed for both the Andes and Mesoamerican groups.
Practice 5.2, page 431
1. D. Sea otters have been able to live in habitats from which they were
once eliminated. Choice (D) is directly supported by the third paragraph
of the passage, which refers to successful “programs to reintroduce the sea
otter into previously populated areas.” Choice (C) is incorrect because the
passage does not indicate that they have reached one-fourth of their former
population numbers. Choices (A) and (B) are not mentioned at all in the
passage.
2. D. The current range of the sea otter in California is larger than it was
in 1930. According to the passage, the sea otter’s range in 1930 “was
limited . . . to about 50 living in a small area between Big Sur and
Monterey Bay.” The map makes it clear that the sea otter’s range now
extends significantly to both the north and south of Monterey Bay. Putting
the information from the passage together with that from the map shows

that choice (D) must be true.
3. C. Without conservation efforts and reintroduction programs, the
range of sea otters in California would be smaller than what is shown
on the map. In the third paragraph of the passage, the author states that
conservation and reintroduction programs “have contributed to” the
expansion of the sea otter’s habitat range in California. This directly
supports the statement in choice (C).

Lesson 6: Interpret Data and Statistics
Practice 6, page 433
1. D. 36 Median is the middle value, so calculate half the total number—
about 1,029,590—to identify the age range with the median. There are
518,672 people included in "Under 18," so add in the 18–19 group, the
20–24 group, and the 25–34 group to reach a sum of 989,456. The 35–49
group will include the 1,029,590 person, so (D) is correct.
2. B. the average margin of victory was higher in years when a Democrat
won than in years when a Republican won In both years in which a
Republican won the presidential election (2000 and 2004) the final
electoral vote count was very close. In each of the four years in which a
Democrat won (1992, 1996, 2008, and 2012) the Democratic candidate
captured a much larger portion of the electoral vote. Thus, choice (B) is
supported by the graph.
3. C. 1920 Of the years shown on the graph, 1920 is the point when the rural
and urban populations are closest in number. Prior to 1920, the rural
population was much larger than the urban population. After 1920, the
urban population begins to be much larger than the rural population.
4. C. 34 million To determine the correct answer to this question, you need to
subtract the range of the rural population from the range of the urban
population. The rural population was around 54 million in 1930, up from
approximately 25 million in 1860. That’s a range of approximately 29
million. The urban population was around 68 million in 1930, up from just
5 million in 1860. That gives a range of approximately 63 million.
Subtracting 29 million from 63 million produces a difference of 34
million, choice (C).

Social Studies Practices Practice Questions, pages 434–436
1. B. The unemployment rate declined consistently until shortly before
the war’s end. Checking the timeline, you can see that World War II
began in 1939 and ended in 1945. Unemployment went down every year
between 1939 and 1944, and rose just slightly in 1945. Thus, choice (B)’s
description of the war’s impact on unemployment is correct.
2. A. the stock market crash Immediately after the stock market crash in
1929, unemployment increases dramatically and directly until 1933. That
makes choice (A) correct. After 1933, unemployment declines gradually
until the end of the war, and the decline is interrupted by a small increase
during 1937–1938.
3. D. The Seneca Falls Convention was a shocking and unnatural event
that undermined the nature of women. There is no objective way to
prove that something is “shocking and unnatural.” Those words reveal that
the statement in choice (D) was the opinion of one newspaper’s editors.
4. D. The Seneca Falls Convention was important in the fight for
women’s rights. The passage’s primary purpose is to explain how the
women’s movement “gained strength” at the Seneca Falls Convention.
5. A. More than half of the reported cases of human plague in the United
States between 1970 and 2010 were reported in four states. Even if you
don’t recognize the four states in question as Arizona, California,
Colorado, and New Mexico, the map clearly shows the overwhelming
concentration of reported plague cases as occurring there. Choice (A) is
justified by the information in the map.
6. C. Several cases of plague were reported on the East Coast of the
United States between 1970 and 2010. The statement in choice (C) is
clearly false given the information in the map. No cases of plague were
recorded east of Illinois during the time period depicted by the map.
7. D. The effects of the cotton gin on the cotton industry actually led to
an increased demand for slaves in the South. The fact stated in choice
(D) is directly supported by the end of the passage where the writer
explains the effects of the cotton gin: “with the boom of the cotton
industry, more slaves were used to pick the cotton at a faster rate.”
8. C. 2,000,000 The increase in the number of cotton bales produced between

1840 and 1860 was approximately 3,500,000. The increase in the number
of slaves living in the United States during the same twenty year period
was approximately 1,500,000. The difference between the two figures is
2,000,000.
9. C. In most years, the percent population increase in South Dakota was
greater than that in North Dakota. Choice (C) is correct. In seven of the
eleven years shown (every year from ‘01–’02 to ‘07–’08 ) South Dakota’s
annual population increase was greater than that of North Dakota. The
increases were approximately equal in ‘08–’09, and North Dakota’s
increase was greater in the remaining three years. Choice (B) makes a
statement about the populations of these states, but the graph only contains
information about percent increase, or proportional increase, of the
population.
10. less than Though North Dakota had far greater growth than South Dakota
toward the end of the period, North Dakota averaged an increase of
approximately 0.77 percent per year over the 11 years, while South
Dakota averaged approximately 0.93 percent per year.
11. 70 percent The mean voter turnout for the years shown is 39.67 percent in
midterm elections and 55.98 percent in presidential elections. 39.67
percent divided by 55.98 percent equals 70.9 percent.
12. C. 13.8 percent “Median” refers to the middle term in a set of numbers
arranged from smallest to largest.
Arrange the terms from the chart in order: 11.1 percent, 11.6 percent, 13.8
percent, 13.9 percent, 14.0 percent. The middle term is 13.8 percent,
corresponding with the correct answer, choice (C).
U.S. History

Lesson 1: Exploration, Colonialism, and the American
Revolution
Practice 1, page 439
1. the Spanish According to the map and the key, Spain had the
southernmost colony along the east coast of what would eventually
become the United States.

2. B. The English established several colonies in the New World. The map
shows several English colonies along the New England coast and in what
is now Virginia and Maryland.
3. D. Haitian refugees who fled to the United States to escape a
dictatorship Like the early colonists, the Haitian refugees of the mid- and
late 1900s came to the United States seeking freedom from political
persecution.
4. B. increased British taxes and restrictions on the colonies The fourth
and fifth sentences of paragraph 4 link increased taxes and restrictions to
the outbreak of the American Revolution.
5. B. They were concerned about the government becoming tyrannical.
The first amendment guarantees citizens’ rights to pressure their
government. The passage explains that the framers of the U.S.
Constitution did not want the government to become overly powerful.
While choices (A) and (C) were both rights listed amongst the guarantees
of the First Amendment, they do not explain why the Framers listed them.
Choice (B) discusses their motivations and is correct.

Lesson 2: Westward Expansion, the Civil War, and
Reconstruction
Practice 2, page 441
1. D. whether slavery should be permitted in territories in the West This
is implied in the third and fourth paragraphs of the passage. Choice (B) is
incorrect because the fourth paragraph says that Abraham Lincoln
promised to halt the spread of slavery, not to end it where it already
existed.
2. C. To balance the admission of Missouri, they agreed to a compromise
in which Maine was admitted as a free state. The third paragraph of the
passage describes how the U.S. government tried to maintain a balance of
power between the North and the South by adding states in pairs: one
slave state and one free state. Since Missouri was a slave state, the most
likely response of Northerners would be to propose the addition of a free
state. (Indeed, Maine and Missouri were the 23rd and 24th states to join
the United States.)

3. concluded with the reunification of the nation The information in the
question indicates that North and South Vietnam were reunited under the
Communists at the end of the Vietnam War. The passage implies that at
the end of the U.S. Civil War, the North and the South again were united
under the United States federal government.
4. C. In 1868, many African Americans served in the government of
South Carolina. There are more than 20 African Americans included in
this composite photograph of the South Carolina legislature. The other
choices are opinions that cannot be confirmed by the photograph.
5. A. Over the course of Reconstruction, African Americans in the South
gained and then lost political power. The number of African Americans
in the composite photograph of the South Carolina state legislature of
1868 indicates that near the beginning of the Reconstruction period,
African Americans had considerable political power. The last paragraph of
the passage on page 440 states that by the 1870s, whites were preventing
African Americans from exercising their newly won right to vote. This
indicates that African Americans were losing political power as
Reconstruction ended.

Lesson 3: Industrialization, Immigration, and the Progressive
Era
Practice 3, page 443
1. B. an increase in manufacturing By definition, industrialization is related
to increased manufacturing. This meaning is implied in the passage in
paragraphs one and two.
2. C. the development of the Bessemer process, which made it easier to
produce steel The first paragraph of the passage relates rapid
industrialization to the invention of new industrial processes. The
Bessemer process was one such process. It made steel more readily
available for tools, railroads, construction, and other uses.
3. C. cooperation with others to improve worker safety The fourth
paragraph indicates that union workers pledged to work together
(cooperate) for better working conditions. The passage states that better
working conditions include improved worker safety.

4. D. fairness The fifth paragraph discusses the Progressive Era. The fact that
reformers were working to improve conditions for poor people and to give
people a greater voice in government indicates that fairness was a strong
ideal for them.
5. Asia and the Americas The second circle graph indicates that, in the years
2000–2009, 77 percent of persons obtaining legal resident status came
from Asia and the Americas.
6. C. In the 1890s, that number was roughly three times what it was in
the period of 2000–2009. The question asks you to compare the number
of persons from Europe in the first circle graph to the number of persons
from Europe in the second circle graph. Keep in mind that the total
numbers represented by the two graphs are different. Calculate that
number for the period 1889–1890: 97 percent of 3,689,609 is about
3,578,920. (You could use your
calculator or estimate to find an approximate number.) Then calculate that
number for the period 2000–2009: 13 percent of 10,299,430 is about
1,338,925. (Use your calculator or estimate.) Now, compare those two
numbers: 3,578,920 is a little less than three times 1,338,925.

Lesson 4: The United States as an Emerging World Power
Practice 4, page 445
1. Military The building of a naval base indicates that the correct category is
“military.”
2. B. In World War II, the Allies included England, France, and Russia.
The author assumes that you realize that the Allies of World War II
included the same major powers as the Allies in World War I. If you do
not recognize this unstated assumption, you will not understand who
fought whom in World War II.
3. C. Unemployment fell after the start of the New Deal and continued to
fall sharply as the United States entered World War II. The graph
shows a decline in the unemployment rate after the New Deal went into
effect in 1934. It shows that unemployment went up in 1938 but then
dropped after that and dropped considerably after the United States’ entry
into World War II in 1941.

4. D. America took a strong leadership role during and after World War
II. The paragraph focuses on the role the United States played during and
after World War II. The other choices are details from the paragraph or
they bring up information not included in the paragraph.

Lesson 5: The Cold War and the Civil Rights Era
Practice 5, page 447
1. Blank (1) no direct combat; Blank (2) dissolution of the Soviet Union
The first paragraph of the passage implies that the name “Cold War” was
used because there was no direct fighting. The first sentence of paragraph
two explains that the Cold War ended when the Soviet Union broke up.
2. C. The buildup of nuclear arms increases fear and instability, not
peace. The statement about peace and stability made by the man on the
right in the bottom frame of the cartoon is supposed to be ironic. The
cartoonist’s reference to the man's trembling arms suggests that the
situation is not stable, and that perhaps we should be afraid.
3. C. Americans were in complete agreement about pulling out of
Vietnam. Paragraph one states that even when defeat for South Vietnam
seemed fairly certain, a few Americans still wanted to continue
contributing to the fighting. Therefore, it is an overstatement to say that
Americans were in complete agreement that pulling out of Vietnam was
the right thing to do.
4. B. petitioning for a city ordinance requiring those selling real estate to
select a buyer without regard to race Paragraph three states that the aim
of the civil rights movement was to end segregation and discrimination in
the United States. Preventing the selective selling of real estate was one
important way civil rights activists worked to end discrimination, making
decreased segregation possible.
5. A. Reliance on technology has increased pollution. This is a conclusion
—a general statement about a topic. The other choices are details—facts
or examples—that support this conclusion.
U.S. History Practice Questions, pages 448–451
1. B. Although the Cherokee adopted many aspects of white culture, they

were driven off their ancestral lands. This statement is the only one with
a large enough scope to be considered a conclusion. The other choices are
details that are either included in, related to, or not based on the timeline.
2. A. If the government can’t protect us from white settlers here, now,
how could it protect us from whites moving west in the future? This
question shows the lack of logic in the government’s claim that location
was what made it difficult to protect Cherokee rights. Location had
nothing to do with the government’s lack of protection of Cherokee land
in the South. The government did not have the political will to enforce
laws protecting the Cherokee.
3. D. equal rights and opportunities for women Adams’s statements that
women are not inferior and her invention of the term Lordess both indicate
that she advocated equality for women.
4. Select any four of: Maryland, Delaware, West Virginia, Kentucky, and
Missouri The map shows that these were all slave states loyal to the
Union.
5. A. The nation’s capital was located nearby. If the nation’s capital,
located adjacent to the state of Maryland, had been surrounded by
Confederate states, it would have been extremely difficult for the U.S.
army to defend it. This would have given a great edge to the Confederacy
during the Civil War. The other choices are untrue, irrelevant, or not
verifiable by the map.
6. D. to weaken the South by enlisting former slaves in the Union army
This was implied by the text of the Proclamation that is quoted. None of
the other choices are supported by the text.
7. Voting Rights Act of 1965 The chart explains that this act prohibited
literacy (reading) tests for voting.
8. C. African Americans were granted the vote soon after the Civil War,
but laws enforcing these rights had to be passed a century later. This
is implied by the passage of the 15th Amendment in 1870 and by the
passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965. Congress would not have
passed the later law if the 15th Amendment were being upheld and
enforced. Choice (A) is true, based on the chart, but is not a summary of
the information in the chart.

9. B. They both prohibited the legal separation of people by race in
public places. The chart shows that both the 1875 and the 1964 Civil
Rights Acts banned racial segregation in public places.
10. D. The telephone was the greatest electrical invention ever. This
statement is said to have been made by leading scientists of the time; this
is not in the author’s voice. It is the only opinion. Choices (A), (B), and
(C) are all facts stated in the passage.
11. B. the framers of the U.S. Constitution The clothes of the men in the
picture indicate that this cartoon is set in the late 1700s. Impeachment is
discussed in the caption. Impeachment was a provision that the framers of
the Constitution included in order to prevent the kind of abuse of
presidential power carried out by Nixon. Impeachment of elected officials
was not discussed in the Declaration of Independence, which laid out the
reasons for the United States’ independence from Great Britain, so choice
(A) is incorrect.
12. A. the pursuit of justice By investigating the circumstances of Watergate,
Congress was trying to make sure that the nation’s laws were carried out.
13. C. the escalation and failure of the Vietnam War Of the choices listed,
only choice (C) describes an event just prior to the Watergate scandal. The
bloodshed and failure of the Vietnam War caused many people to question
authority, including the government, and to question decisions made by
the government.
14. C. 1,000,000 The scale on the vertical axis of the bar graph shows that
population is measured in millions. The bar for Cuba stands one unit high.
This means that about 1,000,000 people of Cuban descent lived in the
United States in 1990.
15. B. Mexico The bar graph shows that most people in the United States who
are Hispanic originally came from Mexico. Therefore, Mexico is the most
likely nation of origin of the unknown family.
Civics and Government

Lesson 1: Historic Basis for U.S. System
Practice 1, page 453

1.
Direct Democracy

In Country D, laws are made by the
vote of all citizens.

Monarchy

In Country B, laws are made by a
sovereign king and are subject to no
review.

Representative Democracy

In Country C, laws are made by
Congress, an elected group of
representatives.

Aristocracy

In Country A, laws are made and
administered by lords who inherit
their lands and titles.

2. B. They were concerned about protecting the rights of individuals.
According to the passage on page 452, the Founding Fathers were
influenced by the Enlightenment philosophers, who did place importance
on the rights of the individual.
3. C. Parliament of England Similar to the United States Congress, the
parliamentary system in England allows for citizens to elect
representatives to a lawmaking body.
4. D. England during the Age of Enlightenment According to the passage
on page 452, England adopted a bill of rights for the individual during the
Enlightenment. This action limited the monarchy’s power over the
individual.
5. D. The president would be appointed by the majority party in
parliament. In most parliamentary democracies, the majority party in the
Parliament appoints the president. Nothing in the text indicates whether
this would make the office of the president more or less powerful than it
currently is, so choices (A) and (B) are unsupported.

Lesson 2: Constitutional Government
Practice 2, page 455

1. B. elected representatives exercising government power on behalf of
citizens According to the first paragraph of the passage, the key
characteristic of a republic is elected officials governing for the voters.
2. C. The details of government would be worked out in the future, as the
need arose, within the framework of the Constitution. The leaders who
drafted the Constitution were wise enough to realize that they could not
anticipate every eventuality, so instead of trying to cover everything in the
Constitution, they made it a general framework within which specific
future decisions and laws could be made.
3. C. the power of an office, not an individual Roosevelt’s long tenure
worried many people as they saw his power growing with time. They
pursued term limits to prevent any individual from amassing too much
power as president.
4. The U.S. Supreme Court declaring an Illinois state law
unconstitutional The supremacy clause asserts the supremacy of federal
law when it conflicts with state law. Therefore, the declaration that a state
law is unconstitutional is an exercise of the supremacy clause.
5. A. State governments do not usually act together. The third and fourth
methods of passing a constitutional amendment both require concerted
action by state governments. Therefore, choice (A) would explain why
those methods have never been used. Choices (B) and (D) are contradicted
by information in the chart. Choice (C) repeats information in the chart,
but does not provide a useful explanation.

Lesson 3: Levels and Branches of Government
Practice 3, page 457
1. A. division of power between national and state governments
According to the second paragraph of the passage on page 456, a federalist
form of government divides power between the national and state levels of
government.
2. D. the State Department The State Department is part of the executive
branch; its head is a member of the president’s cabinet. The Democratic
National Committee, choice (A), is not part of the government at all.
Choice (B) is part of Congress, and therefore part of the legislative branch.

Courts, choice (C), are in the judicial branch.
3. A. Federal judges need not worry about pleasing their constituents in
order to be reelected. Because they do not need to please any
constituents in order to be reelected, federal judges can preside without
worrying about making unpopular decisions. This leaves them freer to be
impartial judges of the law.
4.
Checks and Balances

Limits that one branch of
government can place on the other
branches

Veto

The president’s power to strike
down a law

Senators

Legislators who serve six-year terms

Constituents

The people whom political leaders
represent

Representatives

Legislators who serve two-year
terms

5. B. a member of Congress Although this person subscribes to the idea that
the government is divided into three branches, he can only think of one of
them—the one to which he belongs. Since he is probably in the legislative
branch, he is likely to be a member of Congress. The way the desks are
arranged and the way the man is standing to make his point are visual cues
that the setting of the cartoon is Congress.

Lesson 4: The Electoral System
Practice 4, page 459
1. C. receiving a majority in the Electoral College According to the second
paragraph of the passage on page 458 a presidentmust have a majority in
the Electoral College to be elected.
2. A. Exit polls may be inaccurate if the people polled are not

representative of the political unit as a whole or if the election is very
close. It is more likely that a poll will be wrong if an unrepresentative
sample is used or if the election is very close. Under those circumstances it
is hazardous to call an election based on exit poll results, as was shown in
the 2000 presidential election, in which the media gave Florida’s vote first
to Gore, then to Bush, and only hours later declared the state too close to
call.
3. D. Two city council members are on a ballot to determine which one
will run for mayor as a Democrat. A primary is an election to choose
among candidates of the same party. The winner of the primary then faces
an opponent of another political party in the general election.
4. B. In total, individuals contributed a greater dollar amount to House
candidates than they did to Senate candidates. Although Senatorial
candidates received a higher percentage (greater by 4 percent) of their
contributions from individual donors, the total dollar amount received by
the House candidates was much higher (greater by approximately
$350,000,000). Therefore, the total dollar amount of individual
contributions received by the House candidates was ultimately greater
than that received by the Senate candidates.
5. A. In 2010, self-funding was a larger source of funds for Senate
candidates than it was for House candidates. The Senate candidates’
own contributions accounted for 13 percent of the total Senate Candidates’
Funds while the House Candidates’ own contributions accounted for only
6 percent of the total House Candidates’ Fund. In addition, calculations
based on the total amount of funds reveal that Senate candidates spent
more total dollars on self-funding than did House candidates.

Lesson 5: The Role of the Citizen
Practice 5, page 461
1. The U.S. Constitution According to the third paragraph of the passage,
the Constitution sets forth the rights of citizens.
2. A. resident alien Because she moved here permanently as the wife of an
American citizen, Louvina is a resident alien and will remain so until she
qualifies for citizenship through naturalization.

3. C. They would become enemy aliens. If the country of aliens residing in
the United States declares war on the United States, that nation becomes
an enemy state, and the aliens become enemy aliens.
4. B. privacy The protection against unreasonable search and seizure is
essentially a protection of citizens’ privacy rights. The government must
demonstrate a good reason before it is allowed to search or seize property.
5. C. If the 2012 presidential election is representative of elections
generally in the United States, voter turnout increases with age. This is
the only statement general enough to be a conclusion. All the other options
are details from the graph that support this conclusion.
Civics and Government Practice Questions, pages 462–465
1. B. In 2013, a different major party controlled the House than
controlled the Senate. According to the numbers of the 113th Congress,
the Republicans had majority control in the House and the Democrats had
majority control in the Senate. Choice (A) is too broad to be a summary of
this chart which focuses on political divisions. The conclusions in choices
(C) and (D) require more information than the chart provides.
2. Bill of Rights of the U.S. Constitution, which guarantees citizens
certain rights, Like the Magna Carta, the Bill of Rights of the U.S.
Constitution accords citizens certain rights and protections. Note that the
scope of the Bill of Rights is broader in that it protects the rights of all
citizens, not just a special group, as the Magna Carta did.
3. C. a $3,000 contribution to a party fund for TV ads on political issues
Of all the choices, this is the only donation that is going to a political party
fund rather than to a specific candidate, so it is a “soft money”
contribution.
4. A. People were less aware of soft money because disclosure was not
required at that time. During the 1980s, political parties did not have to
reveal the amount and sources of their soft money contributions, so the
extent of this type of campaign financing was not generally known. Only
when a law was passed requiring disclosure did people become aware of
the scale of soft money donations and so began to raise their concerns
about the issue.

5. C. Jill Stein won a greater percentage of the popular vote than of the
electoral vote in 2012. Jill Stein won 0.36% of the popular vote, but she
did not win any electoral votes in the 2012 election.
6. D. 2012 Presidential Election: Popular and Electoral Votes This is the
only option that covers the topic of the paragraph as well as that of the
graphs.
7. A. The board of election is the county, city, or town office responsible
for local voting. Nowhere in this excerpt from the voter’s guide is the
board of election defined or explained; the writer assumes that the reader
knows what it is.
8.
The Democratic Party, which nominates candidates and tries to win
elections
The National Association of Manufacturers, which lobbies for
businesses

★

The Federal Communications Commission, which regulates
broadcasters
The Cabinet, an advisory body for the president
Public Citizen, a nonprofit consumer rights advocacy group

★

Of all the choices, these two are the only groups that consist of people
with common interests and goals—in this case, manufacturers and
consumers—working by lobbying to influence government policies. The
other choices are either political parties or part of the executive branch.
9. B. Most registered voters don’t vote. Despite the fact that voting is one
of the obligations of citizens, in most elections, less than half of the
nation’s registered voters actually vote.
10. C. civic duty The cartoonist is appealing to voters to take their civic duty
to vote more seriously.
11. A. China, where the top leaders of the Communist party control the
government Of the national governments described, only China is an

oligarchy, a government with rule by a small group of people. The other
options are not oligarchies; they are either democracies or autocracies.
12. A. retribution These laws all embody the urge to take revenge on
wrongdoers, or to exact retribution. The other principles underlie the
modern criminal justice system and other modern legal systems.
13. C. 32 Look for the map key to determine the symbol for death penalty
states. According to the map, 18 states do not have the death penalty, so
32 out of 50 states have the death penalty.
14. D. Two of the five states with the lowest per capita homicide rates
have abolished the death penalty. If that argument were correct, then the
states with the lowest homicide rates should all be death penalty states, but
that is not the case. Two states—Vermont and Hawaii—that have
homicide rates among the lowest in the nation do not have the death
penalty.
15. C. The 1978 Panama treaties sold out U.S. interests to Panama. Choice
(C) states an opinion about the Panama treaties, not a fact that can be
tested or proved. The word in the passage that signals an opinion is
“believed.”
16. D. The mayor has ceremonial duties. In both the mayor-council and the
council-manager forms of city government, at least part of the time, the
mayor plays a ceremonial role.
Economics

Lesson 1: Basic Economics Concepts
Practice 1, page 467
1. B. to convert capital and raw materials into products and services
According to the first paragraph of the passage, labor transforms capital
and raw materials into goods and services that may be sold.
2. D. a plastic material A producer good is something used in the production
of a finished good. Of all the choices, only plastic is a producer good. The
remaining choices are consumer goods, in other words, finished products.
3. A. When the supply of houses is low and demand is high, sellers can

raise their prices. Because of the law of supply and demand, when the
supply of houses is lower than the demand, sellers have more control over
the terms of sale. In that situation, they can raise the asking price. Because
there are many potential buyers, chances are high that a seller will get a
good price.
4. B. Toys are not critical to a nation’s economic and political well-being.
The U.S. government prefers the free-market system and generally
provides price supports only for industries that are extremely important to
the nation’s welfare, such as agriculture and transportation.
5. D. 16 On the vertical axis, locate $.30, and then see where a horizontal line
drawn through $.30 would meet the sloping demand line. The answer is 16
apples.
6. C. As the price of apples rises, Keisha buys fewer apples. The demand
line on the graph shows that Keisha’s apple purchases are related to the
price of apples. As the price rises, her demand for apples falls, and she
buys fewer apples. None of the other choices is supported by the data on
the graph.
7.
a tool
manufacturer

a bicycle repair
shop ★

a paper mill

a microchip
factory

a car wash ★

a beauty salon
★

According to the passage, a service business does not produce or sell
tangible goods but instead offers services. Of all the choices, a car wash, a
repair shop, and a beauty salon all sell services; the remaining choices are
businesses that produce goods for sale.

Lesson 2: The U.S. Economic System
Practice 2, page 469

1. D. Monopolies shut out competition. When a company has a monopoly
on a market, it has great power to squelch competing firms that try to enter
the market. This is implied in the last two sentences of the second
paragraph of the passage.
2. rising unemployment Of all the economic factors listed, only high
unemployment is associated with recessions, according to the third
paragraph of the passage.
3. A. Property owners have a stake in the future value of the property.
Since property can increase or decrease in value, its owner is motivated to
do things that will maintain or increase its value.
4. C. buying stock in a new company, such as an Internet startup In
general, investing in stocks is riskier than choice (A), saving money in a
bank, or choice (B) buying a certificate of deposit (or CD, as they’re
commonly called). Choice (C), investing in a startup that has no track
record of turning a profit, is also riskier than choice (D), investing in a big,
well-established company like Microsoft.
5. D. Despite ups and downs, the gross domestic product generally
increases over time. Even though the gross domestic product rises and
falls with business cycles, the general trend shown by the graph is for the
gross domestic product to rise over the long term.
6. A. They provide capital for businesses to grow. One of the similarities
between saving and investing in stocks is the ultimate use of the money. In
both cases, the money allows businesses to start or expand operations as
banks loan money they hold in savings accounts and the purchase of stock
directly funds the company issuing the stock.

Lesson 3: The Economy and the U.S. Government
Practice 3, page 471
1. registers revenues that exceed its expenditures As implied in the first
paragraph of the passage on page 470, a budget surplus occurs when the
government takes in more tax and other revenue than it spends.
2. C. cutting the federal income tax If Congress cut the federal income tax,
consumers would have more money to spend. This strategy has been used

to stimulate the economy. The other choices would decrease consumer
spending or have no direct effect on consumer spending.
3. D. the air traffic control system Like the federal highway system, the air
traffic control system facilitates transportation, which is critical for
economic activity.
4. D. Both affect the amount of money circulating in the economy. Fiscal
and monetary policies are two tools the government uses to control the
money supply. Increasing the money supply by lowering taxes or lowering
interest rates stimulates the economy, and decreasing the money supply
slows the economy.
5.
Money out of
Circulation

Money into
Circulation

Sell government Buy back
securities (bonds government
and Treasury
securities
bills) to investors
Raise the
discount rate
member banks
are charged to
borrow from the
Fed

Lower the
discount rate
member banks
are charged to
borrow from the
Fed

Raise the reserve
requirement, the
amount banks
must keep on
hand to cover
deposits

Lower the
reserve
requirement

According to the passage, policies that increase the amount of money in
circulation are used to stimulate the economy. Therefore, all three of the

choices listed on the chart under Money into Circulation could be used by
the government to stimulate the economy.
6. C. Our complex economy takes time to respond. Since the economy is
made up of the actions of millions of people, any Fed action takes time to
have an overall effect that is measurable.

Lesson 4: Labor and Consumer Issues
Practice 4, page 473
1. C. wages and benefits According to the first paragraph of the passage on
page 472, themoney a worker earns plus the value of his or her benefits
equals total compensation.
2. A. Workers must learn skills throughout their lives to be prepared for
changes in their industries. This is the conclusion that the writer comes
to after describing the steelworkers who lost their jobs and had to retrain
when much of their industry moved overseas.
3. woman buying a computer Of all the choices, this is the only one in
which a person is buying a product, so that person is a consumer.
4. A. All for one and one for all. When workers unite in labor unions, all of
them together have the power to benefit each of the individual members.
Similarly, each member supports the goals of the union as a whole.
5. A. in 2000 The lower line on the graph shows the number of unemployed
civilians. That line is at its lowest point at the year 2000.
6. B. As the number of employed civilians rose steadily from 2003 to
2006, the number of unemployed slowly declined. The graph shows that
the number of employed civilians rose from about 137 million to about
144 million from 2003 to 2006. At the same time, the number of
unemployed civilians dropped slightly—by about 2 million.
Economics Practice Questions, pages 474–477
1. B. the various types of resources needed for an economy to produce
goods and services According to the passage, the factors of production
include all the resources—natural, human, and man-made—needed to
produce products and services.

2. D. entrepreneurs In a communist nation with centralized economic
decision making, there is no place for individual entrepreneurs. The
government decides what will be produced and how it will be produced.
3. A. an office building An office building is a capital resource. Choice (B)
is a natural resource, choice (C) is labor, and choice (D) is an
entrepreneur.
4. A. In a balanced budget, revenues equal expenditures. This explanation
of a balanced budget is a fact. The remaining choices express opinions
held by many fiscal conservatives.
5. A. More than half of all personal income was earned through work in
February 2013. According to the chart, the primary source of personal
income in 2013 (approximately 60 percent) was from wages, salary, and
other forms of employee compensation.
6. D. an investor The man in the plaid shorts represents an investor who
buys and sells stock on the stock market.
7. C. He is accustomed to stock market ups and downs. Like the roller
coaster in the background, stocks gain and lose value, often precipitously.
The investor is calm because he has experienced the ups and downs of the
stock market, so a roller coaster ride feels familiar to him.
8. person who runs a home day-care center This is a person who is running
a business out of his home and so is self-employed. Therefore, no federal
income tax is withheld from her earnings, and he must pay estimated tax.
9. B. individualism Individualism is one of the core values of a society with
a free enterprise economic system, because each person is free to make his
or her own economic decisions.
10. 2009 A budget deficit occurs when the government is spending more
money than it is collecting in revenue. The larger the gap between the
revenues and the expenditures, the larger the country’s deficit. In the fiveyear span depicted on the chart, the largest gap between the revenues and
expenditures exists in the year 2009.
11. B. income tax returns and expense records The federal budget is similar
to a family budget; it differs primarily in scale. For a family, income tax
returns provide documentation of revenues (income), and expense records

such as grocery receipts and credit card bills provide a record of
expenditures. None of the other choices includes records of both income
and expenditures.
12. D. The national network of interstate highways is paid for mostly by
federal excise taxes. Of all the choices, (D) contains the main details of
the paragraph. Choices (A), (B), and (C) each focus on only one
supporting detail.
13. A. When cheaper imported goods force out U.S.-made goods, U.S.
factory workers often lose their jobs. Free trade may benefit the
economy as a whole in the long term, but as the economy adapts, some
individuals (in this case, factory workers) lose in the short term.
14.
Agency

Function

Food and Drug
Administration

Protects public
from poorly
processed and
improperly
labeled foods
and drugs

Federal Trade
Commission

Protects
consumers
from
misleading
and/or
fraudulent
advertising

Consumer Product
Safety
Commission

Protects
consumers
from risk of
injury or death
from
hazardous
products

Security and
Exchange
Commission

Protects
investors from
being misled
about stocks
and bonds

National Highway
Traffic Safety
Administration

Protects
consumers by
testing vehicle
safely and
monitoring
nationwide
speed limits

According to the chart, the Federal Trade Commission exists to protect
consumers from misleading and/or fraudulent advertising.
15. A shortage of the product When a product’s price falls below the
equilibrium point, demand for the product increases, and thus the supply
decreases, causing a shortage of the product.
16. B. what causes high rates of unemployment The unemployment rate is a
factor in the economy as a whole, so it is a subject of study to a
macroeconomist. All of the other choices relate to the economic actions of
individuals or companies, which are not the main interest of a
macroeconomist.
17. C. As the price per eraser increases, manufacturers supply more
erasers. According to the graph, as prices rise, manufacturers are willing
to supply more erasers as they see an opportunity for more profit.
Geography and the World

Lesson 1: Early Civilizations
Practice 1, page 479
1. B. the Maya According to the passage, the Maya recorded their
discoveries about mathematics and astronomy in a pictographic writing
system.

2. Ancient Greece; Ancient Rome As stated in the passage, the Greek idea
of democracy, in which citizens voted, and the representative government
and laws of ancient Rome were great influences on the founders of the
United States.
3. A. Both developed flood control and irrigation technologies to boost
food production. Both ancient Egypt and the civilizations of the Fertile
Crescent grew up along rivers. The passage points out that in both areas,
people learned to control floods and irrigate fields in order to improve
food production.
4. B. towns The food surpluses that result from agriculture mean that not
everyone must grow or gather her own food. Therefore, some people are
free to live in towns where they can pursue a craft or business in exchange
for food from farmers. The other options occur without the gathering
together of people in settlements.
5. D. ancient Egypt Ancient China developed along a great river, the Yellow
River. Of the civilizations listed, only ancient Egypt also grew up along a
river, the Nile. In both ancient China and ancient Egypt, the river kept the
soil rich and damp.
6. C. The Yellow River was probably the main trade route between
Loyang and Chengchow. Not only were rivers the source of water for
irrigation, they were major thoroughfares for the transport of goods. Since
both cities are on the Yellow River, trade between them most likely took
place by river at that time.

Lesson 2: Feudalism to Nation States
Practice 2, page 481
1. C. to protect their noble’s land from attack According to the passage,
the role of the knights in feudal society was to protect their noble’s estate,
or land.
2. Spain Of the lands mentioned in the passage that were conquered by the
Muslims, only Spain is in Europe. Thus, of the European nations marked
for selection in the map, Spain is the one in which you would most expect
to find evidence of Muslim culture.

3. B. the migration of people from farms to industrial cities in the 1800s
Like the migration to the cities in the 1800s, the migration from manors to
towns in the late Middle Ages resulted from economic causes. In both
migrations, people were seeking better economic opportunities than
farming offered.
4. A. Roman Catholics accepted the authority of the pope and
Protestants did not. According to the passage, this was one of the main
differences between the two branches of Christianity.
5. A. accepted legal principles Since the manor court did not rely on a
written body of legal rulings, its actions were unpredictable. Most people
felt they would get a fairer ruling in the royal courts, which were bound by
written common law that applied to everyone in the kingdom.
6. C. The population of Western Europe showed almost constant growth
with only brief periods of decline. This is the best summary because it
contains the main idea (Europe’s population rose from 500 to 1500) and
important details (two brief periods of decline).

Lesson 3: The Age of Revolutions
Practice 3, page 483
1. C. the U.S. Declaration of Independence According to the passage, the
American Revolution and its goals of democracy (as expressed in the
Declaration of Independence and the Constitution) were big influences on
the French.
2. D. Members of the Third Estate owned the least amount of land per
person. With 98 percent of the population but only 70 percent of the land,
the Third Estate owned the least land in proportion to its numbers.
Members of the First and Second Estates owned more land in proportion
to their percentage of the population.
3. had a parliament; did not have a parliament This contrast is stated in
the third paragraph of the passage. It is one of the reasons French citizens
were dissatisfied with their lack of representation in the monarchy of
Louis XVI.
4. C. possessing large landholdings The last paragraph of the passage on

page 482 states that farmland had been the economic mainstay of the
aristocracy up until the time of the Industrial Revolution, which began late
in the eighteenth century.
5. B. A sovereign nation is independent, having the power to govern
itself. In the passage, the word sovereign is used but not explained; the
author takes for granted you know what it means. The remaining options
are all stated in the passage.
6. D. the Industrial Revolution Like the Industrial Revolution, the
Information Revolution is an economic revolution that has brought about
social change. The other revolutions are all political in nature.

Lesson 4: Exploration, Colonialism, and Wars
Practice 4, page 485
1. A. pay the Allies money to repair war damages According to the
passage, paying reparations was one of the provisions of the Treaty of
Versailles.
2. C. the invasion of Poland The third paragraph of the passage indicates
that to avoid going to war, the Allies permitted Germany to take over, or
annex, Austria and Czechoslovakia. However, Germany’s invasion of
Poland spurred England and France to declare war.
3. B. national pride The Japanese had a great deal of national pride, which
they found difficult to put aside. Thus it took the destruction of two cities
and thousands of deaths to overcome their reluctance to surrender.
4. D. Both were won by the Allies. Of the options listed, the fact that the
Allies won both wars is the only similarity. Choices (B) and (C) are true
only of World War II, and choice A is not true: both wars involved other
parts of the world.
5. B. The United States sustained only a few civilian casualties. The chart
indicates “very few” civilian dead in the United States; every other cell in
the chart has a number in the thousands or millions.
6. A. the 1812 French invasion of Russia, which failed due to harsh
weather and lack of supplies Both the French and German invasions
failed due to weather and lack of supplies, making them similar. The

campaigns and actions mentioned in the other answer choices failed for
different or unspecified reasons.

Lesson 5: Humans and the Environment
Practice 5, page 487
1. C. the move of an individual or population from one geographic area
to settle in another The first paragraph of the passage on page 486
implies that the key char-acteristics of migration are the movement of
people and their settling in a new place.
2. B. the westward movement of the American population from the 1700s
to the present Because this migration took place within the U.S. borders,
it is an internal migration. The other choices all involve people moving
from one country to another.
3. are more densely populated than The passage describes suburban areas
appearing as a consequence of urban areas becoming too crowded. Thus,
the text implies that urban areas (cities) are more densely populated than
suburbs (neighboring towns).
4. D. the automobile Automobiles make it possible for many people to live
in the suburbs, where the distances between a home and retail stores and
workplaces can be considerable and public transportation may be lacking.
5. D. the projected total world population in 2050 To answer this question,
first locate 9,039,000,000 on the graph. (Note that the figures are given in
millions, so the number to locate is written as 9,039.) It represents a total
world population figure. Then look at the bottom axis to see what year that
bar represents.
6. C. Most of the population growth in the 50 years from 2000 to 2050
will occur in the less developed nations. The bar graph shows that the
proportion of the world population living in the more developed nations
(shown in gray) is relatively small, and shows that it is predicted to remain
relatively small over the next 50 years. In contrast, the graph predicts that
the population in the less developed nations (shown in white) will grow
much more. The remaining choices are not supported by the data on the
graph.

Lesson 6: Using Resources Wisely
Practice 6, page 489
1. A. materials that will never run out or can be replaced if used
According to the first paragraph of the passage on page 488, a renewable
resource can be replaced (for example, replanting a field that’s been
harvested) or is in endless supply (for example, wind and solar power).
2. D. rotating crops In crop rotation, a farmer plants different crops in
succeeding growing seasons in order to conserve nutrients in the soil. The
other choices are all examples of a nonsustainable use of a resource;
eventually, each will cause the resource to be used up.
3. A. negotiating in an international forum An international forum
provides a framework for nations to work to resolve conflicts over
resource use before the problems escalate.
4. C. short-term benefit versus long-term benefit Finding and using new
oil deposits is a short-term solution to U.S. energy problems because it
doesn’t solve the underlying problem in the long run. Developing
alternative sources of energy requires more investment of time and capital
with an uncertain outcome, but it has the potential to help meet long-term
U.S. energy needs.
5. B. carpool to work and school Carpooling saves gas, a nonrenewable
resource.
6. former U.S.S.R. The second column lists current production figures; the
highest figure in the column is 25.7, that of the former U.S.S.R.
7.
(1)

North America

(2)

Europe

(3)

former U.S.S.R.

(4)

Africa

To answer this question, look at the column labeled “Reserves to

Production Ratio.” This column indicates the relationship between the
amount produced annually and the total amount the region has. Regions
with lower ratios will run out of gas before regions with higher ratios.
Geography and the World Practice Questions, pages 490–493
1. A. How Germanic Tribes Governed The focus of the passage is the
minimal governmental structure of the Germanic tribes.
2. C. The Industrial Revolution started in Great Britain and spread to
Europe, but by 1900 the United States was the leading industrialized
nation. This summary statement has all the major details from the
paragraph—the start of the Industrial Revolution in Great Britain, its
spread to Europe, and the lead taken by the United States. The other
choices either focus too narrowly on a couple of details or are too broad to
be an effective summary.
3. Egypt (along the Nile River) The map key gives the dates of each
civilization shown on the map. Egypt, Kush, and Axum were the earliest
civilizations. They are all located along the Nile River in the northeast part
of Africa.
4. A. Over 800 years, several civilizations succeeded one another in
western Africa. The civilizations of Ghana, Mali, and Songhai developed
one after the other in the same region of Africa. None of the other choices
is supported by information on the map.
5. 1498—Da Gama sails to India for Portugal by going around Africa Da
Gama’s voyage opened up new trading opportunities for the Portuguese.
Note from the timeline that the Portuguese dominated trade in the East
Indies from about 1510 to 1600.
6. A. Spanish and Portuguese domination of exploration gave way to that
of the Dutch, French, and English. According to the timeline, most
Spanish and Portuguese exploration and conquest took place during the
1500s. From the 1600s on, other nations such as England, France, and the
Netherlands increased their activity considerably. The other choices are
incorrect or cannot be determined from the information in the timeline.
7. Pizarro Like Cortés, Pizarro explored on behalf of the Spanish rulers. He
conquered the Inca Empire in South America.

8. B. The Age of Exploration This title describes the era and events shown.
The other choices are too narrow, too broad, or simply incorrect.
9. D. After the Cold War ended, defense spending began to fall. The
graph shows defense spending decreasing in the period 1990–1995, after
the Cold War ended in 1990. None of the other choices is supported by
data on the graph.
10. B. Colonies should be economically independent. Of all the choices,
only this one is an opinion. The other choices are facts that are stated in
the paragraph.
11. B. the migration of thousands of farm families to other regions The
Dust Bowl temporarily disrupted farming in the Great Plains, forcing
farmers to migrate to find work. While the Dust Bowl contributed to the
Great Depression, (choice (A)), it was not the Great Depression’s only or
primary cause.
12. D. the spread of the Sahara into the grazing land on its southern
border The Sahara, the desert that covers much of northern Africa, has
been spreading steadily southward into the Sahel, a dry grasslands region
that has been overused as grazing land.
13. D. The problem of feeding the world’s population is a matter of
political will rather than one of resources. This is an opinion attributed
to agriculture experts in the passage. The remaining choices are all facts
stated in the passage.
14. B. Nevada gained seats in the House. The passage tells you that the
population shifts were large enough that seats in the House were
reallocated. Since Nevada had a large population gain, it is likely that it
also gained seats in the House. Choices (A) and (D) are stated outright
rather than implied by the passage. Choice (C) does not have to be true
based on the information in the passage. Because immigration also played
a role in population changes, it does not have to be the case that people
moved away from the Northeast and Midwest.
15. B. a visitor to Philadelphia This is a special-purpose map designed to
help visitors find their way around the airport and locate transportation
routes to and from the airport.
16. D. Labels for terminals and parking areas are coordinated to provide

convenient parking. The map shows Terminal E by Lot E, Terminal D by
Garage D, and so on.

Science
Science Practices

Lesson 1: Comprehend Scientific Presentations
Practice 1, page 501
1. C. The causes of type 2 diabetes The passage as a whole discusses the
causes of type 2 diabetes. Choices (A) and (D) are not discussed in the
passage. Choice (B) is mentioned in the second paragraph but is only a
supporting detail.
2. D. The causes of type 2 diabetes are not fully understood. This question
asks for the main point of just the first paragraph, which explains that
scientists do not fully understand the role played by various factors in
causing diabetes. Choices (A) and (B) both commit the same error: that is,
they mention a specific detail from the first paragraph while missing the
big picture. Choice (C) contradicts the paragraph.
3. B. A study of 18–25 year olds showed that a majority did not produce
enough insulin to offset the high amounts of sugar they were
consuming. The question asks for a detail that serves to support the idea
that high sugar consumption may contribute to the development of type 2
diabetes. Only choice (B) does so. Choice (A) is a detail that is indeed
mentioned in the paragraph, but only as background information. It does
not serve to support the author’s point that sugar consumption may
contribute to diabetes. Choice (C) brings in “genetic factors,” which are
not mentioned in paragraph two. Although choice (D) may be implied by
the author’s use of hesitant language, such as “one contributing factor may
be high sugar consumption,” this does not support the paragraph’s main
idea.
4. A. As moist, flowing air encounters rising elevations, it cools, which
causes condensation, a stage that precedes precipitation and cloud
development. In interpreting this diagram, follow the arrows. The

diagram depicts air flowing toward hills or mountains. As it does so, the
air cools and condensation happens. Based on the arrows, that stage
happens before the stages of precipitation and cloud formation. Choice (B)
suggests that the air becomes static at the highest elevations, which is not
supported by the diagram. Choice (C) also contradicts the diagram. Choice
(D) is unsupported because the diagram does not have an east-west
orientation: just because the air is depicted flowing from the left-hand side
of the picture does not mean that it’s flowing from the west.

Lesson 2: Use the Scientific Method
Practice 2.1, page 503
1.
Independent
Variable

Dependent
Variable

combinations of
bacteria

acne symptoms

The researchers were studying the question of how different combinations of
bacteria affect acne symptoms. Because the researchers thought acne
symptoms might depend on differences in bacteria, acne was the researchers’
dependent variable. Combinations of bacteria are not affected by acne
symptoms, but the researchers thought bacteria might affect those acne
symptoms. Therefore, combinations of bacteria were the researchers’
independent variable.
2. B. Different kinds of bacteria may impact acne differently. The last
sentence of the first paragraph provides this answer as well. The
researchers “began to wonder whether different strains of bacteria might
impact acne in different ways”: that statement represents the idea they
sought to test—that is, their hypothesis. Choice (A) describes an
assumption that was widely held before the researchers began their study.
Choice (C) is a suggestion the researchers made after concluding their
study, and choice (D) is their conclusion—not their starting hypothesis.
3. D. Some combinations of bacteria may actually help ward off acne.

This question asks for the researchers’ conclusion—that is, the idea they
embraced after concluding their study. That idea is described by choice
(D). Choice (A) is an assumption many people held before the research
began. Choice (B) is not supported by the passage. Choice (C) is not
supported by the passage: after drawing their conclusions, the researchers
suggested a way to treat acne in the future, but they did not suggest that
current treatments are misguided.
4.
a) Form a
hypothesis.

iii. Based on your
experience, you
make a guess
about which of
the movements
involved in
playing softball
puts the greatest
stress on the
knees. You
suspect that it
may be stopping
suddenly after
running a short
distance.

b) Design a test
for your
hypothesis.

i. You make a list
of each of the
movements
involved in
softball. In the
off season (when
you are not
playing entire
games), you plan
to perform each
movement
several times

without
performing the
others.
c) Collect data to iv. After
test your
performing each
hypothesis.
movement in
isolation, record
how your knee
feels. Let your
knee recover
between tests of
each type of
movement.
d) Form a
conclusion based
on the data from
your test.

ii. Based on the
data you
collected in your
experiment, you
think it is likely
that stopping
suddenly after
running a short
distance is indeed
the cause of your
knee pain.

Practice 2.2, page 505
1. A. experiment; observational study In an experiment, the researcher
directs the behavior of both treatment and control groups. In an
observational study, those groups are selected based on their current
behavior, and that behavior is not directed by the researcher.
2. B. no, because the survey is not a random sample of the relevant
population Luke is interested in the effectiveness of the vending machine
ban for all students, not just soccer players. Thus, he must draw a sample
from across the student body.

3. D. The women were not randomly assigned to groups, so another
factor besides where they give birth could affect complications. This is
an observational study, not an experiment, so a risk is that the two groups
are different in another way, besides where they give birth, that affects the
outcome. For example, if a woman has a high-risk pregnancy and expects
to have complications, she may be more likely to choose to give birth in a
hospital, resulting in a spurious correlation between hospital and
complications.

Lesson 3: Reason with Scientific Information
Practice 3, page 507
1. C. If both objects were currently sitting still, it would require more
effort to push the brick across the floor than it would to push the
block of wood across the floor. According to the passage, a heavier
object has more inertia, and the brick is heavier than the block. Therefore,
you can conclude that it would be harder to move the brick across the
floor. Choice (A), breakage, and choice (D), absorbing water, are not
mentioned and are irrelevant to this question. Choice (B) is the opposite of
the correct answer.
2. A. The birds that the brown tree snake eats are the primary predators
of spiders on Guam. The scientist’s conclusion is that the brown tree
snake is the reason there are so many spiders on Guam. The question asks
for a piece of information that makes that conclusion more likely—that is,
a choice that makes the scientist’s conclusion more reasonable or
believable. Choice (A) explains why more brown tree snakes would lead
to more spiders. Choices (B) and (D) don’t link the spiders and snakes at
all. Choice (C) describes a relationship between them, but it suggests that
more brown tree snakes would lead to fewer spiders.
3. B. If large areas of ice sheets sit on water, the rising of sea levels may
proceed more quickly than had previously been predicted. The main
idea of the passage is that some ice sheets may be sitting on water and that
those ice sheets may melt more quickly than ice sheets sitting on rock. The
passage also states that melting ice sheets contribute to rising sea levels.
Putting those two ideas together, a scientist could predict that ice sheets
sitting on water might send more melted water into the oceans than would

ice sheets on rock. Choice (A) expresses the opposite of that idea. Choice
(C) introduces a comparison that is not supported by the passage. Choice
(D) goes too far by insisting that all of the quickly melting ice sheets are
sitting on water.
4. A. Most of the ice sheets sitting on water are covering inland lakes
with no access to the ocean. Choice (A) would make the prediction less
likely, because if most ice sheets sitting on water have no way to send
water into the ocean, then the link between the ice sheets and rising sea
levels would be undermined. Choices (B) and (C) actually make the
scientist’s prediction more likely. Choice (D) may seem to undermine the
information in the passage—until you notice that choice (D) criticizes the
use of “radar alone” to assess ice sheets. The passage indicates that
researchers used both satellite and radar data, which makes choice (D)
irrelevant to the prediction.

Lesson 4: Express and Apply Scientific Information
Practice 4, page 509
1. C. Pure acetone; A solution of sugar in acetone The passage states that,
during osmosis, a liquid moves from a place where there is a higher
concentration of dissolved material to where there is a lower concentration
of dissolved material. Thus, to test the rate of osmosis of a liquid, Gillian
would want to put that same liquid on two sides of the vat, with more
dissolved material on one side than on the other. Only choice (C)
describes that arrangement.
2. D. formic acid The solvent with the highest rate of diffusion would be the
solvent that took the least time to reach equilibrium. Here it took formic
acid the least time to do so.
3. 19.5 minutes To find the average time, add the times of the solvents, then
divide by the number of solvents.

4. greater than The passage explains that drinking seawater will result in a
higher-than-normal concentration of dissolved material in your
bloodstream. Then, according to the passage, water will flow from your

tissues into your blood. For that to be an example of osmosis, it must be
the case that the water is flowing from a place (your tissues) where the
concentration of dissolved material is lower to a place (your blood vessels)
where it is higher. Thus, your tissues would start to dry out when the
amount of dissolved material in your blood vessels is greater than that in
your tissues.

Lesson 5: Use Statistics and Probability
Practice 5, page 511
1. rabbit The median is the middle number of a set of numbers, and in this
graph, the rabbit has a lower body weight than the dog, human, and horse
and a higher body weight than the shrew, cactus mouse, and flying
squirrel. It isn’t necessary to know the animals’ actual body weights to
determine this.
2. rabbit Similarly, the graph shows that the rabbit has the middle metabolic
rate of the seven species in the graph.
3. lower than the previous average To find an average, you add up all the
numbers in a list and divide by the number of items in the list, like this:

Now, the shrew is the highest of those numbers: it has the highest metabolic
rate. Therefore, if you removed it and recalculated the average, the new
average would be lower than the previous average.
4. C. Their metabolic rate would be slightly lower than that of horses.
The question states that elephants weigh more than horses. Thus, elephants
would be to the right of horses on the line graph. Based on the curve of the
line, you can guess that elephants would have a slightly lower metabolism
than that of horses. Because the line continues to decrease slightly, choice
(B) is unsupported.
5. C. 120 The question asks how many different orderings, or sequences, of
the five crops are possible. This is a permutations question, because order
matters. Thus, multiply to find the number of permutations:

Lesson 6: Construct Short Answer Responses
Practice 6, page 513
1. C. 2 Each water molecule contains one oxygen atom; the coefficient 2
indicates that there are two water molecules, so there are a total of 2
oxygen atoms in the two molecules combined.
2. 10 The basic formula shows that two molecules of hydrogen combine with
one molecule of oxygen to form two molecules of water. Thus, you can
use a proportion to determine how many H2O molecules are produced by
the reaction; since the number of water molecules produced is equal to the
number of hydrogen molecules (that is, twice the number of oxygen
molecules), the number of water molecules produced is 10.
3. B. 4 The last number in the formula, 16, represents v2, so take the square
root of both sides to find v:

4. D. be four times as great. The original velocity is 4, so calculate the
kinetic energy by doubling this value: Ek =

× 10 × 82 =

× 10 × 64 =

320 J. This is 4 times 80 J.
Science Practices Practice Questions, pages 514–517
1. B. While Copernicus’s theory was an important development, it
included elements that are outdated today. The first sentence of the
second paragraph provides the main idea. The words “[f]or example” help
to make clear that the second and third sentences are details supporting
that main idea.
2. C. “The Significance and Limitations of the Copernican Theory” The
title of a passage should reflect its topic or main idea. The topic of this
passage is the importance, or significance, of Copernicus’s theory, as well
as the fact that Copernicus’s theory was not completely correct. Choices
(A) and (D) are both too broad, while choice (B) is incorrect because the

passage is not about Copernicus’s life.
3. A. Astronomers now believe that the planets are not embedded in
crystalline spheres. The question asks for something that can be inferred,
or deduced, from the passage. Choice (A) is supported by the passage.
Copernicus’s idea that the planets are embedded in crystalline spheres is
mentioned in the second paragraph as an example of an idea that is today
considered “primitive.” This implies that astronomers today no longer
believe this to be true. Choices (B) and (C) are contradicted by the
passage. Choice (D) is not supported by the passage: primitive
astronomers who came before Copernicus are not discussed.
4. C. B and D The passage describes what happens when you add heat to a
substance: the temperature of the substance increases, up to the point when
the substance starts to change from a solid to a liquid or from a liquid to a
gas. Then the temperature of the substance holds steady while the
substance is undergoing that change. When more heat is added but the
temperature of a substance remains constant, it must be undergoing a
phase change. The places in the diagram where the temperature is flat—B
and D—thus represent the two places where the substance is changing
from solid to liquid or from liquid to gas.
5. For this question, read the passage carefully to find each type of cancer and
identify the cause associated with it.
Type of Cancer Cause
mesothelioma

long-term
asbestos exposure

cervical cancer

human
papillomavirus

liver cancer

hepatitis B

lung cancer

long-term regular
inhalation of
tobacco smoke

6. B. Penrith The black bars on the graph represent each city’s previous

record, and the gray bars represent its current record. Find the city for
which the gray bar is furthest above the black bar: Penrith.
7. C. Penrith The median number is the middle of a list of numbers. Here,
because there are seven cities, the city with the “previous record equal to
the median of all the cities’ previous records” simply means the city with
the middle value (among the previous record values). Fortunately, the
cities are represented in the graph in such a way that their previous records
are in ascending order, and the median previous record belongs to Penrith.
8. B. Temperatures increased 5 degrees or less. The largest increase was in
the city of Penrith and was approximately 5 degrees.
9. C. Why, when I touch the metal filing cabinet, do I experience more
electrostatic shocks than my assistant does when she touches it? The
first paragraph of the passage explains that the office manager “wondered
why” she experienced more static shocks than her assistant. That’s the
question that prompted her experiment. While it is true that the office
manager decided to switch to cotton clothing, she didn’t begin by
wondering whether it was better, so choice (A) is incorrect. Choice (B)
distorts the office manager’s thoughts. Choice (D) places too much
emphasis on shoes, which were not the subject of the office manager’s
experiment.
10. D. The office manager wore one type of clothing, while her assistant
wore another type of clothing, and they recorded the number of
shocks they experienced. The office manager wanted to test her
hypothesis that her nylon clothing was causing her to experience shocks
when touching a metal filing cabinet. To do so, she conducted an
experiment in which she wore cotton clothing for a week, while her
assistant wore nylon clothing; both wore identical shoes. Then the
manager and assistant recorded the number of shocks they each
experienced during the course of a week. Choice (D) correctly describes
this experiment. Choice (A) describes the office manager’s hypothesis.
Choice (B) describes the office manager’s course of action after she had
completed her experiment, while choice (C) is the opposite of what
actually occurred during the experiment (both the manager and the
assistant wore identical shoes).
11. A. They wanted to test the effect of their clothing on the number of

shocks they experienced, and wearing different types of shoes might
have confused their results. In an experiment, it is important to control
factors other than the one thing the experimenter wants to study. In this
case, the office manager wanted to study the effect of clothing on the
number of static shocks she was receiving. Choices (B) and (C) wrongly
suggest that shoes were the subject of the office manager’s experiment.
Choice (D) distorts the passage: during her experiment, the office manager
was trying to study static shocks—not avoid them.
12. C. a new hypothesis Remember, a hypothesis is a guess that a researcher
starts with and then tests through an experiment. If the office manager
formed a new guess about what was causing the static shocks, and she
intended to study that new guess through an experiment, that would be a
new hypothesis. It would not, at that point, be choice (A), a new
conclusion based on findings. While she might, as choice (D) suggests,
design an experiment to test this idea, the idea itself is not an experiment
design. And the idea is certainly not choice (B), a general principle from
the study of physics; rather, the office manager is making a guess based on
observation.
13. C. 15 This is a combinations question: you are asked for all possible
groupings of two out of the six snails, and the order of snails within each
group does not matter. Use a table or an organized list to find the number
of possible groupings. Name the snails A–F if that makes it easier.
AB
AC

BC

AD

BD

CD

AE

BE

CE

DE

AF

BF

CF

DF

EF

Count the possible pairs: there are 15.
14. 6.3% The question asks for the probability that any given star is a class G
star, and we have to combine two probabilities to find it. We know that
there is a 90 percent chance, or a .9 probability, that a star will be a main

sequence star. We also know that, if it is a main sequence star, there is a 7
percent chance, or a .07 probability, that it will be a class G star. Multiply
those two probabilities to find the probability of both of them happening:
.9 × .07 = .063. Express your answer as a percentage: 6.3%.
15. current smokers The question asks specifically about femoral plaques, so
look at the femoral plaques category in the table. The percent of men who
have femoral plaques is the percent of small femoral plaques (14%) plus
the percent of large femoral plaques (41%). It is also 100 minus the
percent of no femoral plaques. Since less than 50% of the current smokers
have no femoral plaques, more than 50% of the current smokers do have
femoral plaques.
Life Science

Lesson 1: Cell Structures and Functions
Practice 1, page 519
1. mitochondrion According to the diagram’s labels, energy is produced in
the cell’s mitochondria (plural of mitochondrion).
2. D. Cell walls cannot maintain a plant’s shape and rigidity when the
plant lacks water. Even though cell walls contribute to keeping a plant
firm and rigid, they cannot do the job without water-filled vacuoles. This
conclusion follows from the fact that a plant that lacks water will wilt.
3. A. the presence of a nucleus According to the passage, the presence of a
cell nucleus defines a cell as eukaryotic.
4. A. Each time the microscope is improved, scientists can see cell
structures more clearly. Since cell structures are tiny, the more a cell is
magnified, the more detail can be seen.
5. B. Oxygen would diffuse from the unicellular organism into the pond
water. Since diffusion is the movement of molecules toward areas of
lower concentration, if the organism had more oxygen than the
surrounding water did, oxygen would pass out of the organism into the
water until the concentrations were equalized.

Lesson 2: Cell Processes and Energy
Practice 2, page 521
1. D. carbon dioxide, water, and energy According to the equation that
summarizes cellular respiration, the products of this process are carbon
dioxide, water, and energy.
2. A. increasing the amount of light the plants receive each day Because
light is required for photosynthesis, increasing light is the best choice for
increasing the rate of photosynthesis. The other options either would have
no effect or would decrease the rate of photosynthesis.
3. B. increasing the number of green plants Because green plants use up
carbon dioxide during photosynthesis, increasing the amount of greenery
on Earth would help reduce the amount of carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere.
4. stoma According to the diagram, carbon dioxide enters the leaf through
openings in the bottom, called stomata (plural form of stoma).
5. B. Most of a leaf’s chloroplasts are found in its palisade cells. The
diagram shows that most of the leaf’s chloroplasts are in the palisade cells.
Evidence to support the other choices cannot be found in the diagram.

Lesson 3: Human Body Systems
Practice 3, page 523
1. A. the circulatory system According to the passage on page 522, the
circulatory system transports blood to all the cells of the body.
2. C. Both are structures in which substances pass through capillary
walls into the blood. Both alveoli and villi are tiny structures containing
capillaries in which substances pass to and/or from the blood. In the
alveoli of the respiratory system, oxygen and carbon dioxide pass into and
out of blood; in the villi of the digestive system, nutrients pass into the
blood.
3. D. Veins have valves that allow blood to flow in one direction only. Of
the four facts given, this is the only one that involves the direction of flow
of the blood. Therefore, it helps to support Harvey’s conclusion that blood
in the veins flows toward the heart.

4. Ureter According to the diagram, the ureter is the only structure
connecting the kidney to the bladder, so urine must flow through them to
reach the bladder.
5. B. a patient with a painful kidney stone Because a kidney stone forms in
the urinary system, the patient is most likely to be treated by an urologist.

Lesson 4: Health Issues
Practice 4, page 525
1. D. the skin As implied by the passage, the skin is one of the first defenses
against germs, along with mucous membranes, tears, and stomach acid.
2. C. habituation Although Sara feels an urge to drink wine, she feels no ill
effects if she does not; this indicates that she is habituated to alcohol. She
has a psychological dependence rather than a physical dependence on
alcohol. If her dependence were physical, she would feel the effects of
skipping her daily drink.
3. A. Fats are a more concentrated source of energy than carbohydrates.
According to the table, carbohydrates provide 4 calories per gram while
fats provide 9 calories per gram. None of the other statements is supported
by the information in the table.
4. B. Carbohydrates come from fruits as well as from bread and rice.
According to the table, bread and rice are not the only foods that provide
carbohydrates; fruits and at least one type of vegetable (potatoes) also do.
Choices (A) and (D) are recommendations, not facts. Choice (C) is
contradicted by the table.

Lesson 5: Reproduction and Heredity
Practice 5, page 527
1. tall According to the Punnett square, each parent has the same genotype:
Tt. The capital letter T represents the tallness allele, and the lowercase t,
the shortness allele. Because tallness is dominant, each parent plant is tall.
The paragraph also states that the parent plants are tall.
2. B. 1 out of 4 According to the Punnett square, only one out of four
possible combinations yields a short plant (one with two recessive alleles

for height: tt).
3. D. TT If you want to grow only tall plants, then it is better to use purebred
tall plants (TT). If you use hybrid tall plants—(Tt) or (tT)—then in the
next generation, you will likely get some short plants in your garden.
4. 2 According to the passage on page 526, in order to show a recessive trait,
an organism must inherit two recessive alleles for that trait. If it inherits
only one recessive allele, the dominant form of the trait will show.
5. D. Organisms that reproduce sexually produce offspring that have
inherited a mix of traits from their parents. Because they are inheriting
a mix of genes from two parents, the offspring of organisms that
reproduce sexually are different from the parents and from each other,
creating a more diverse population. When an organism reproduces
asexually, the offspring are identical to the parent and to each other, which
means less diversity in the population.
6. B. The black male was actually a hybrid. The only way a white rabbit
and a black rabbit could produce a white offspring is if the black rabbit is
carrying the recessive allele for white fur. That means the black rabbit was
actually a hybrid, not purebred as the student had assumed.

Lesson 6: Modern Genetics
Practice 6, page 529
1. C. the sequence of base pairs in a gene According to the third paragraph
of the passage on page 528, particular sequences of base pairs code for
particular amino acids, which are the building blocks of proteins.
Therefore, as the paragraph concludes, the order of bases on a gene forms
a code for making a particular protein.
2. D. a change in protein synthesis Since DNA provides the blueprint for
protein synthesis, any change in DNA may affect protein synthesis.
3. D. Genetically engineered foods are safe for consumers and the
environment. This is an opinion; it is not a fact that can be proved true
from the information in the text. All the other statements are facts, based
on information given in the paragraph.
4. B. so that each daughter cell receives a complete set of DNA Cell

division produces two daughter cells with genetic material, or DNA, that
is identical to that of the parent cell. The DNA must be replicated in the
parent cell first so that each daughter cell can receive an exact copy of it.
5. B. The base guanine pairs only with the base cytosine. According to
both the diagram and the passage, in DNA sequences, the base guanine
always pairs with the base cytosine. (Note that in the diagram, each base is
represented by its initial.) The remaining statements are not supported by
the passage or the diagram.
6. amino acids Amino acids are described as protein building blocks in the
third paragraph of the passage on page 528.

Lesson 7: Evolution and Natural Selection
Practice 7, page 531
1. B. Frogs’ forelimbs contain carpal bones. All four homologous
structures in the diagram include the same layout of bones: humerus,
radius, ulna, and carpal bones. Since frogs’ limbs are homologous to those
of the other three animals, they will likely have the same bones. Choices
(A), (C), and (D) may be true, but they are not supported by the diagram.
2. C. In penguins, flying birds, humans, and alligators, the forelimbs
have similar structures despite performing different functions. Even
though the forelimbs of these organisms look alike, they all perform
different functions. The arm helps to lift and hold things, the penguin’s
flipper helps it to swim, the bird’s wing helps it to fly, and the alligator’s
foreleg helps it to walk.
3. A. traits that make an organism better able to survive in its
environment According to the passage on page 530, adaptations are traits
that some individuals possess that enable them to compete successfully in
their environment.
4. C. DNA analysis provides more objective data than observation does.
DNA analysis is more objective than observation, because the person
doing the observing must interpret what he or she sees.

Lesson 8: Organization of Ecosystems

Practice 8, page 533
1. D. the sun The ultimate source of energy for the food web on the previous
page is the sun. This is implied by the first paragraph, which explains that
the green plants at the bottom of the food web produce their own energy
from the sun. The other species in the food web ultimately depend on
those consumers for food.
2. B. The populations of hares and seed-eating birds would increase.
With fewer foxes to hunt them, more hares and seed-eating birds would
survive long enough to reproduce, increasing the populations of these
organisms.
3. B. an aquarium with aquatic plants and herbivorous tropical fish An
aquarium is a human-made ecosystem with living organisms in balance
with one another and with their physical environment. It includes both
producers (the aquatic plants) and consumers (the herbivorous, which
means plant-eating, fish).
4. D. The natural replacement of lichens by mosses and ferns, and then
shrubs, is an example of succession. According to the information,
succession is a naturally occurring replacement of one ecosystem by
another.
5. C. to turn atmospheric nitrogen into compounds plants and animals
can use According to the information, nitrogen-fixing bacteria on the
roots of plants like peas and beans take nitrogen and use it to form
compounds that plants and animals can use.
Life Science Practice Questions pages 534–537
1. B. Active transport requires the cell to use energy, and passive
transport does not. According to the information given, the key
difference between active and passive transport is the use of the cell’s
energy.
2. C. The water level in the jar might have gone down because of
evaporation. Because the experiment did not control for evaporation, it
does not prove that the water was absorbed by the ivy.
3.

The paragraph indicates that squares stand for males and half-shading
represents genetic carriers. Of all the choices, only the square that
represents Megan’s father is half-shaded, indicating that Megan’s father is
a carrier of cystic fibrosis.
4. D. No one in either Megan’s or Will’s immediate family has cystic
fibrosis except Cailin. Since everyone in the pedigree except for Cailin
has only the recessive gene for cystic fibrosis, no one else suffers from the
disease. Thus, Cailin’s family members were probably unaware that some
of them were carriers for cystic fibrosis.
5. B. metaphase According to the diagram, the chromosomes line up across
the middle of the cell during metaphase.
6. B. After mitosis, the two daughter cells have their own nuclei. The two
daughter cells in the interphase section of the diagram each have their own
nuclei.
7. A. At least one pair of chromatids failed to split during anaphase.
Under normal conditions, mitosis produces two identical daughter cells by
duplicating the chromosomes and then evenly splitting the chromatids
between the two daughter cells. If one daughter cell has more
chromosomes than the parent and the other daughter cell has fewer, the
chromatids were not divided evenly between the two. The diagram shows
that chromatids are separated during anaphase. Thus, the chromatids did

not divide evenly in anaphase; at least one pair did not split.
8. C. The fossil record for any given species may be incomplete. Because
fossils are found at random, scientists cannot be sure they have a complete
fossil record for many species. An incomplete fossil record would also
explain why evolution sometimes seems to take place in bursts rather than
gradually.
9. D. nutrient transport and immune defense According to the
information, plasma transports nutrients. White blood cells defend against
infection.
10. A. enamel The diagram shows that the top surface of the tooth is made of
enamel.
11. few or no nerve endings The diagram shows that decay must pass
through dentin to reach the pulp. It suggests that decay is only painful
once it reaches the pulp due to the many nerve endings located there.
Thus, it is likely that the dentin has few or no nerve endings.
12. B. grazing too many cattle on grassland Overgrazing of domestic
animals like cattle can destroy much plant life in grassland ecosystems.
When that happens, the number of cattle the grassland can support
decreases, as described in the paragraph.
13. A. DNA analysis provides more fundamental, accurate data than does
a visual analysis of structures and fossils. Because DNA analysis
involves genetic data at the molecular level, it is a better indicator of the
relationships among organisms than visible similarities such as teeth. Thus
DNA analysis has changed the way scientists previously classified some
organisms.
14. A. panting A dog’s panting and a human being’s sweating are both
processes that cause loss of body heat through the evaporation of water. In
other words, they are body processes that function to cool off an
overheated animal.
15. 3 Unintentional injuries, chronic lung diseases, and cancers all caused
more deaths in 2011 than in 2005.
16. biggest decrease The gray bar representing 2011 is shorter than the black
bar representing 2005, meaning the number of deaths decreased. The

decrease is greater than that of cerebrovascular disease, and the other three
causes of death all increased.
17. B. 8% decrease To find the percent change, first subtract to find the
amount of the change. The number of deaths from heart diseases in 2005
was roughly 650,000, and the number in 2011 was roughly 600,000. So
the amount of change was 50,000. Now, divide that by the original value:
. To convert that number to a percent, multiply by 100: 8%.
Since the number of deaths from heart diseases in 2011 was lower than in
2005, there was an 8 percent decrease.
Earth and Space Science

Lesson 1: Structure of Earth
Practice 1, page 539
1. A. changes in Earth’s crust According to the passage on page 538, the
theory of plate tectonics explains how major landforms are created, the
continents move, and the seafloor spreads, all of which are changes in
Earth’s crust.
2. (1) consist primarily of iron; (2) is mostly solid; (3) is mostly liquid As
the passage states, both the inner and outer core are made mostly of iron;
the main difference is that the outer core is liquid and the inner core is
solid.
3. D. a destructive margin According to the passage, destructive margins
are places where one plate is being forced beneath another, and deep
ocean trenches are characteristic of destructive margins between oceanic
and continental plates.
4. D. The west coast of Africa seems to fit into the east coast of the
Americas. Of the four choices, only this one provides evidence to support
the idea that there used to be one continent made up of the pieces that are
the continents we know today. The fact that two continents seem to fit
together like the pieces of a jigsaw puzzle suggests that they were once
part of one continent.
5. C. The continents of North America and Europe are moving apart.

Since the Atlantic Ocean is getting wider, it follows that the continents on
either side of the Atlantic are moving further apart.
6. B. A single large landmass called Pangaea existed about 250 million
years ago. The existence of Pangaea is a theory based on evidence, not a
fact. All the other choices are facts that can be proved true.

Lesson 2: Earth’s Resources
Practice 2, page 541
1. D. 177 To find the consumption of petroleum in 2011, locate 2011 on the
horizontal axis. Then imagine a straight vertical line from 2011 to the
graph line. Now imagine a straight horizontal line from that spot on the
trend line to the vertical axis to find the approximate number of Btus. Note
that Btus are British thermal units, a unit for measuring energy.
2. 14 The range of a data set is the difference between its highest value and
its lowest value. In 2011, the world petroleum consumption was
approximately 177 quadrillion Btus, and in 2003 it was approximately 163
quadrillion Btus. The difference between them is roughly 14 quadrillion
Btus.
3. A. World petroleum consumption increased by about 14 quadrillion
Btus between 2003 and 2011. This is the best summary of the graph
because it includes the topic of the graph (world petroleum consumption)
and the amount by which consumption changed during the period shown.
4. D. Waste not, want not. One of the basic approaches of conservationists
is to reduce consumption of resources by decreasing waste (“waste not”).
If that is done, in the future the resources will still be available (“want
not”).
5. B. Developed nations have started using water more efficiently than
they did in the past. Since population and economic activity are
increasing faster than water use in the developed nations, the most likely
reason is that people have learned to conserve water, meaning they use
water more efficiently now.
6. D. Soil erosion is caused by both natural forces and the actions of
people. The first sentence mentions several causes of soil erosion. These

include natural actions, such as wind, water, and ice, along with human
actions, such as deforestation and poor farming practices.

Lesson 3: Weather and Climate
Practice 3, page 543
1. D. southwest to northeast The label describes the winds as “westerlies,”
and the arrows indicate that the winds generally move from the southwest
to the northeast. It follows that weather patterns move along with the
winds, from southwest to northeast.
2. B. The winds in the Northern Hemisphere are a mirror image of those
in the Southern Hemisphere. If you compare the two sets of winds, you
will see that those in the Northern Hemisphere are a reflection of those in
the Southern Hemisphere, just as an image is reflected in a mirror.
3. D. satellites, which transmit cloud photos and weather data Satellite
photos of cloud patterns help meteorologists identify hurricanes and
follow their paths; weather data help them follow changes in the intensity
of the storm. Thus, the photos and data from satellites help meteorologists
make predictions about the development and movement of hurricanes.
4. D. global wind and ocean current patterns According to the passage,
both global wind patterns and ocean currents redistribute heat from the
solar heating of Earth.
5. D. The highest temperatures in the atmosphere are in the
thermosphere. According to the chart, the thermosphere has temperatures
of up to several thousand degrees Fahrenheit—much higher than
temperatures in the other layers.
6. Place your stick figure in the troposphere. As the lowest layer of the
atmosphere, the troposphere is where human beings live and work. Even
many airplane flights stay within the troposphere.

Lesson 4: Earth in the Solar System
Practice 4, page 545
1. D. Mercury A planet’s revolution is its orbit around the sun. Locate the
column that shows the planets’ revolution periods. Then review the data in

the column until you find the shortest revolution period. That would be 88
Earth days, which is the time it takes Mercury to travel once around the
sun.
2. B. Venus Of all the planets, Venus is closest in size to Earth. Venus’s year
is also closest in length to Earth’s year. These features make Earth and
Venus the most similar of the choices given.
3. C. Uranus was not clearly visible with the telescopes generally in use at
the time. According to the information given, Herschel made excellent,
powerful telescopes, so he probably saw a much sharper image of Uranus
than did previous astronomers and was therefore able to recognize its
unique color and shape.
4. B. Saturn Saturn has 53 moons according to the chart. That is many more
than Uranus and Neptune, and three more than Jupiter.
5. D. faith in human judgment and decision-making skills This is the only
value that relates to the possible benefits of sending a crewed mission
rather than a robotic mission.
6. B. an atom, with a dense nucleus and electrons orbiting the nucleus Of
all these choices, the structure of the atom is most similar to the structure
of the solar system, even though the atom is much tinier.

Lesson 5: The Expanding Universe
Practice 5, page 547
1. (1) Sirius; (2) Canopus The brightest star as seen from Earth is the one
with the lowest apparent magnitude. According to the chart, that is Sirius.
Absolute magnitude is the measure of brightness of a star as if it were 32.6
light-years away from Earth. Therefore, the star with the lowest absolute
magnitude would be the brightest, if all were seen at 32.6 light-years’
distance. Canopus has the lowest absolute magnitude, so it is the brightest
of the stars.
2. C. The star’s apparent magnitude would be equal to its absolute
magnitude. Since the absolute magnitude of a star is defined as the
brightness an object would have at 32.6 light-years from Earth and the
apparent magnitude is its brightness as seen from Earth, then an object that

was actually 32.6 light-years from Earth would have the same apparent
and absolute magnitude.
3. D. Not all stars are located about 32.6 light-years from Earth. The
apparent magnitude is a measure of how bright the star looks from Earth.
(A small, close star might look very bright compared to a large, distant
star.) However, the absolute magnitude is a measure of how bright a star
would be if it were a set distance from Earth. These numbers are not
necessarily similar, since the apparent magnitude does not take the star’s
distance into account while the absolute magnitude does.
4. B. It is a main-sequence star. According to the passage on page 546, stars
like the sun have about a 10-billion-year life cycle. Since the mainsequence stage is the longest, a star that is about 4.7 billion years old
would be a main-sequence star, in the middle of its life cycle.
5. D. Pluto should be classified as a dwarf planet. Choices (A), (B), and
(C) are factual details about Pluto. Choice (D) is not a fact but rather a
recommendation (that is, an opinion) of the scientists.
Earth and Space Science Practice Questions, page 548–551
1. A. The moon and the sun exert the greatest pull on Earth’s oceans
when these bodies are all in a line. According to the paragraph, when the
sun, moon, and Earth are in a line, the highest tides, called spring tides,
occur. The paragraph also states that tides are caused by the gravitational
pull of the moon and the sun on the oceans. Putting this information
together, the paragraph supports the idea that the moon and the sun exert
their greatest pull on the oceans when these bodies are all in a line, during
spring tides. None of the other statements is supported by the paragraph.
2. C. Iceland, an island nation in the Atlantic with active volcanoes An
area with active volcanoes has lots of magma near the surface, so it is
ideal for geothermal energy, which is a renewable resource.
3. D. 26 percent According to the passage, dark matter is matter that does not
interact with light, and according to the graph, dark matter may make up
26 percent of the universe.
4. D. Ordinary matter is made of the chemical elements. Of all the
statements, only choice (D) is a fact that can be proved at this time. The

other three choices are hypotheses, proposed explanations for things that
have been observed but not proved.
5. D. tropical-subtropical First locate the equator on the map. Then consult
the map key to identify the climate represented by the most common color
that occurs near the equator.
6. A. The continent with the least area of desert-steppe climate is Europe.
To find the answer to this question, you must check each statement against
the map. If the map proves the statement is false, you can eliminate that
statement. If the map doesn’t show what the statement indicates, you can
also eliminate that statement. Choice (A) is the only statement confirmed
by the map.
7. farm output With a large food output, an area can easily support its
human population. This not only contributes to the area’s wealth, but it
also frees a good portion of the population to do other work, producing
wealth.
8. 4 Count the number of climate zones represented on each continent:
North America: 5
South America: 5
Europe: 2 (note the islands near Europe that have a polar climate)
Asia: 5
Australia: 3
Africa: 4
Find the average of those numbers:

.

9. (1) Earth; (2) the moon According to the diagrams, a lunar eclipse occurs
when the shadow (the umbra) of Earth falls on the moon, which happens
when Earth is between the sun and moon.
10. C. A lunar eclipse can be seen only at night, and a solar eclipse can be
seen only during the day. The lunar eclipse diagram indicates that a
person on the daylight side of Earth would not be able to see the lunar
eclipse; only a person on the nighttime side would see it. The solar eclipse
diagram indicates that a person on the nighttime side of Earth would not
be able to see the eclipse; only a person on the daytime side would see it.

11. D. a catalytic converter, a device in the exhaust system of a vehicle
that reduces harmful emissions from the engine Of all the choices, only
this one reduces the harmful pollutants of burning fossil fuel and so would
reduce acid rain.
12. B. dry deposition of sulfur dioxide emissions from a nearby coalburning power plant According to the passage, dry deposition is the
process by which sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide cling to dust particles
that settle on surfaces. When these contaminated dust particles are washed
off by rainwater, the chemicals dissolve in the rainwater, causing acidic
runoff that ends up in streams and lakes. Note that the calcium carbonate
mentioned in choice (A) would have the opposite effect: it would make
rainwater more basic, not more acidic.
13. A. The rock cycle is a continuous process of rock formation,
destruction, and reformation. The diagram is a cycle diagram, which
shows a process that occurs again and again; in this case, the process of
the formation and destruction of rocks.
14. sedimentary rock An imprint can only occur in soft material like sand,
mud, or silt. The diagram shows that when this material is compacted,
sedimentary rock forms. This rock will contain the imprint as a fossil.
Note that fossils sometimes also occur in metamorphic rock, but this is not
presented as an option.
15. A. melted rock According to the diagram, igneous, sedimentary, and
metamorphic rocks all form magma by melting.
16. C. Open-pit mining destroys valuable land. An open-pit mine destroys a
huge area, so it is restricted in many countries to prevent large-scale
destruction of land. There is no reason to suspect, based on the
information given, that choice (B), open-pit mining, is more dangerous
than shaft mining or choice (D)—it yields lower-grade minerals.
Physical Science

Lesson 1: Atoms and Molecules
Practice 1, page 553
1. A. The sodium atom loses an electron, becoming positively charged,

and the chlorine atom gains an electron, becoming negatively charged.
According to the diagram, the sodium atom gives up an electron to the
chlorine atom. With one fewer electron than protons, the sodium becomes
a positively charged ion. When the chlorine atom gains an electron, it has
one more electron than protons, making it a negatively charged ion. The
sodium and chloride ions are attracted to each other, forming an ionic
bond.
2. D.
According to the passage on page 552 and the question text,
a chemical formula represents the number of atoms of each element in a
compound. Chemical symbols, which are letters, represent the elements,
followed by subscripts, which represent the number of atoms.
3. (1) not necessarily either positively or negatively charged; (2) either
positively or negatively charged The key difference between a nonionized atom and an ion is the gain or loss of an electron, which gives the
ion either a negative or a positive charge.
4. B. Most of the alpha particles passed right through the gold foil.
Because most of the alpha particles passed right through the foil without
being stopped or deflected, Rutherford concluded that atoms must consist
mostly of empty space.
5. B. 11 The atomic number of sodium refers to how many protons the atom
has. An atom that is not an ion has the same number of protons as
electrons. Therefore, a sodium atom has 11 electrons.

Lesson 2: Properties and States of Matter
Practice 2, page 555
1. A. melting and boiling According to the passage on page 554, adding heat
to a solid melts the solid, and adding heat to a liquid causes it to boil, or
change to a gas.
2. B. Solids are usually denser than liquids and gases. If you compare the
densities of the solids, liquids, and gases in the chart, you will see that the
solids are denser than the liquids and the gases.
3. 190 According to the paragraph, glycerin’s boiling point is 190˚ greater
than water’s boiling point. To find the percentage by which glycerin’s

boiling point is greater than that of water, divide the difference between
the two substances’ boiling points by the boiling point of water and
multiply the quotient by 100%. Thus,

. Always read

questions carefully. Glycerin’s boiling point is 290 percent of water’s
boiling point, but this question asks for the percent by which glycerin’s
boiling point is greater than water’s.
4. A. Water is a unique substance on Earth. This statement is a conclusion
(a general statement) that is supported by the statements that give details
about the properties of water.
5. B. Antifreeze added to water in a car’s radiator lowers the freezing
point below 0°C. Adding antifreeze (a solute) to water (a solvent) lowers
the freezing point of the solution, the liquid in the radiator.
6. D. dusty air Dusty air is the only choice with large suspended particles.
Gold and oxygen are elements, not mixtures. Salt water is a solution; it has
small particles that do not settle out of the mixture.

Lesson 3: Chemical Reactions
Practice 3, page 557
1. C. 2Cu + O2 → 2CuO You can eliminate choice (A) because the product
(CuO) is on the left side of the equation rather than on the right side. To
determine which of the remaining answer choices is correct, you must
look for the equation that has two copper atoms and two oxygen atoms on
the left side to balance the two copper atoms and two oxygen atoms on the
right side.
2. B. Weigh the reactants, conduct the reaction in a sealed container, and
weigh the products. This procedure should result in the weights of the
reactants and products being equal, because none of the products would
escape from the sealed container. The weight measurements would
provide evidence for the law of conservation of mass.
3. Juanita ignites the gas = activation energy Activation energy is the
amount of energy required to start the reaction. The gas burns =
exothermic energy Burning gas creates exothermic energy, given off in
the form of heat and light. The egg solidifies = endothermic energy The

energy the reactants absorb from their surroundings is endothermic
energy.
4. C. the time during which the reaction occurs The horizontal axis is
labeled “Time,” so you can eliminate choice (D). The graph shows the
progress of the reaction, which takes place over time, not just one instant
of the reaction, so you can eliminate choices (A) and (B).
5. A. Compounds are substances consisting of two or more elements
chemically combined in a definite proportion. The writer of the
paragraph takes for granted that you know what a compound is and does
not define the term compound in the paragraph. The other answer choices
are stated explicitly in the paragraph.
6. B. “Acids and Bases” The passage gives an overview of acids and bases
and describes what happens when they react with one another.

Lesson 4: The Nature of Energy
Practice 4, page 559
1. C. Energy cannot be created or destroyed, but can only change in
form. According to the third paragraph on page 558, this is the law of
conservation of energy.
2. chemical, electrical, light The batteries use chemical energy and convert it
to electrical energy, which is converted to light energy in the filament of
the lightbulb.
3. B. power Power is the rate at which work is done or, in this case, the rate
at which energy is consumed. The wood stove has greater power than the
oak tree because it consumes the tree’s energy in much less time than it
takes the tree to consume the sun’s energy.
4. B. the relationship between energy and mass According to the passage,
Einstein’s equation explains how energy can be converted to mass, and
vice versa.
5. B. At the high point of its swing, a pendulum has potential energy. The
diagram shows that at the high point of its swing, the pendulum has
potential energy, the energy of position. The information in the diagram
does not support any of the other statements.

6. A. The molecules in air are far apart. Because the molecules of a gas
like air are far apart, they are in contact with one another less frequently
than are the molecules of a liquid or solid, since liquids and solids are
much denser. That is why gases have lower conductivity than liquids and
solids do.

Lesson 5: Motion and Forces
Practice 5, page 561
1. D. anything that changes the rest or motion of an object According to
the passage on page 560, this is the definition of a force.
2. D. the tendency of an object to remain at rest or in motion According
to the third paragraph on page 560, inertia is described in Newton’s first
law of motion as the tendency of objects to remain at rest or keep moving
until acted upon by a force.
3. B. the International Space Station orbiting Earth The key concept
regarding centripetal force is circular motion, and the orbit of the space
station is the only example of circular motion among the options given.
4. decreases when its velocity decreases The fifth paragraph on page 560
indicates that momentum is calculated by multiplying mass and velocity.
Slowing a car before a collision decreases the car’s momentum. Because
momentum is a measure of energy of movement, slowing the cars will
result in less energy on collision and so less damage to both cars.
5. B. an object that has a constant speed The graph shows a straight line
that slopes upward. Accord-ing to the paragraph, this type of graph shows
an object that is moving at a constant speed.
6. C. Some machines simply change the direction of a force. According to
the information given, a machine is a device that changes the direction or
the size of a force, which means that some machines change only the
direction of the force. An example is a simple pulley, which allows you to
push down, rather than pull up, to lift a load.

Lesson 6: Electricity and Magnetism
Practice 6, page 563

1. B. two poles repelling one another According to the diagram, like poles
repel, so a drawing of two north poles facing each other would look the
same as the diagram of two south poles facing each other.
2. A. Copper and aluminum are conductors. Electrical wires need to be
made of something that carries electricity easily, which is what conductors
do.
3. D. a flashlight According to the passage, direct current is used in batterypowered devices. Choice (D) is correct because flashlights typically run
on batteries.
4. D. a transformer According to the passage, transformers change the
voltage of an incoming electric current.
5. lightbulb According to the paragraph, a device that gets power from a
current is called a resistor. Since the battery in the circuit powers the
lightbulb, the lightbulb is a resistor.
6. C. Disconnecting the light bulb will also stop the current. To have
current, you need to have a loop. Getting rid of any piece of the circuit—
the battery, the switch, the lightbulb, or the wire—would break the loop
and thus stop the current.
Physical Science Practice Questions pages 564–567
1. B. 5,730 years This information is in the table, in the row for carbon-14
and the column for half-life.
2. D. Uranium produces radioactive waste that may harm living things
for millions of years. Since the question asks what an opponent of nuclear
power would say, the correct answer should be a negative fact about
uranium. According to the table, uranium is unstable for millions or even
billions of years, so choice (D) is both negative and true. Choice (C) is a
negative claim about uranium, but it’s a false one—uranium is unstable for
much longer than three days.
3. D. Both involve the transfer of energy through matter or space.
According to the paragraph, a wave is something that transfers energy
through matter or space, so both types of waves would have that in
common. Longitudinal waves have forward-and-back displacement, while
transverse waves have up-and-down displacement, so choices (A) and (B)

are incorrect. Choice (C) is incorrect because only longitudinal waves
involve compressions.
4. A. A cork in water bobs up and down as waves pass. The question asks
for an example in which something stays in roughly the same place after a
wave passes through it. If a cork merely bobs up and down as waves pass,
then the cork will be in its original position after the waves stop. Thus,
choice (A) is the right example.
5. A. dust motes dancing in a shaft of sunlight Brownian motion is the
random movement of particles in a liquid or a gas. Choice (A) is correct
because dust motes move about randomly in the air, which is a gas.
Choice (C) is wrong because it doesn’t involve movement, choice (D) is
wrong because the raft is on a lake (not in it), and choice (B) is wrong
because the ground is a solid.
6. Increase rate of reaction: Use powdered marble. Decrease rate of
reaction: Use larger chunks of marble. The passage says that the greater
the surface area of the reactants, the faster the reaction will go. Surface
area in this case refers to the amount of marble in contact with the acid.
Thus, using larger chunks of marble will slow down the reaction, since
larger chunks will have more “inner” marble, which won’t be exposed to
the acid. This will reduce the surface area. On the other hand, using
powdered marble will mean that practically all of the marble is exposed to
the acid, making the surface area large and causing the reaction to go
faster.
7. decreases The paragraph says that the bigger the pressure, the smaller the
volume (and vice versa). So, when pressure increases, volume will
decrease.
8. C. xenon (Xe) According to the chart, the noble gases are in column 18.
Choice (C), xenon, is the only choice in this column.
9. B. Chlorine (Cl) and iodine (I) have similar properties. According to
the information given, elements in the same column have similar
properties. Since chlorine and iodine are in the same column, choice (B) is
correct.
10. A. microwaves According to the diagram, wavelengths increase as you go
left to right. Since microwaves are to the right of the visible spectrum,

choice (A) is correct.
11. C. People can see only a small portion of the electromagnetic
spectrum. In the diagram, the visible spectrum—the section that people
can see—is only a small piece of the entire electromagnetic spectrum.
12. B. Its mass remains the same, and its weight decreases. The mass of an
object doesn’t depend on anything; rather, mass is a property of the object.
By contrast, the weight of an object gets smaller as the object gets farther
from Earth. So, as a rocket travels away from Earth, its mass won’t
change, but its weight will get smaller.
13. B. Coldness cannot be transferred. The paragraph directly states that
heat can be transferred, choice (A), a cold object can be warmed by your
body (choice (C)), and that your body heat can be lost (choice (D)). What
the passage assumes but doesn’t say is that only heat can be transferred;
coldness can’t be. This is choice (B).
14. D. the range All of the engineer’s recorded speeds are off by 3.7 km/hour,
which skews the mean, mode, and median upward. However, the range is
unchanged, because the difference between the largest value and the
smallest value is the same in both columns (195.6 km/hour).
15. C.

This question asks about the planes’ actual speeds, so be sure to use

the “actual speed” column. Four of the five planes have a speed less than
km/hour, and once one of those planes is chosen, three of the four
remaining planes will have a speed less than 360 km/hour. Thus, the
probability that both chosen planes have a speed less than 360 km/hour is
.
16. B. The difference in power between the two PEMFCs increased over
time. According to the graph, the power of the PEMFC with HSP (line
with white squares) increased over time while the power of the PEMFC
without HSP (line with black circles) slightly decreased over time. Thus,
the difference in power between the two PEMFCs increased over time.
Note that the power of the PEMFC with HSP did not increase the same
amount each interval, so it did not change at a constant rate, making
choice (C) incorrect.

GED® Practice Test Answers and Explanations
Reasoning through Language Arts
Pages 570–591
1. B. describe types of interviewers and how to approach them The author
is chiefly concerned with explaining that different interviewers have
different personalities and that you should approach those interviewers
differently.
2. C. Our ability to “read” others makes us form instant, lifelong
relationships with some people. The author makes this general claim in
the first paragraph but does not support it with evidence. Choices (A) and
(D) are stated or implied in the first paragraph and then supported with
evidence in paragraphs 2–4. Choice (B) is a generalization made in
paragraph 3, not paragraph 1.
3. D. interviewers with homey, comfortable offices and interviewers
whose offices seem less welcoming The author contrasts these two types
of interviewers in the third and fourth paragraphs of the passage.
4. A. Interviewers have some influence or control over their office
arrangements. In paragraphs 3 and 4, the author explains that you can
learn a great deal about an interviewer’s personality from the type and
arrangements of furniture in the interviewer’s office. However, in order
for this to make sense, the author must be assuming that interviewers have
some say about their office arrangements. If an interviewer had no
influence over her office, then the office would not provide reliable
information about the interviewer’s personality. The passage does not
discuss the virtues of email (choice (B)) or the relative importance of
different aspects of preparing for an interview (choice (D)). Choice (C) is
out of scope. This passage is about prospective hires, not employees.
5. Arrange the elements of the author’s argument in the order in which they
appear:
1st

C. The author makes

2nd

3rd

4th

a generalization
about how your
ability to “read” an
interviewer can be
useful.
A. The author claims
that an interviewer’s
email style tells you
something about that
interviewer.
D. The author cites
specific evidence
about why an
interviewer’s email
style may be helpful
to you.
B. The author claims
that the arrangement
of an interviewer’s
office tells you
something about that
interviewer.

6. D. You should try to understand your interviewer’s personality and
tailor your responses to him or her accordingly. Only choice (D)
summarizes the author’s overall argument. The other choices are either
details (choice (A)) or not mentioned in the passage (choice (C)).
7. A. jumping from a roof before an audience Cleo loves attention. Her bet
that she can swing upside down from an oak tree would have resulted in
her either winning her sisters’ money or gaining attention because she got
hurt. Jumping from a rooftop would provide Cleo with attention whether it
went well or poorly.
8. D. Pa’s In this paragraph, the author describes Pa’s love for Cleo and why
she has so much influence over him.
9. Arrange the plot elements in chronological order:

1st

2nd

3rd
4th

C. One day Cleo
said that she did
not want a kiss but
wanted a copper
instead.
D. Cleo asks her
sisters to bet on
whether she can
swing from her
feet in an oak tree.
A. Cleo envisions
her own funeral.
B. Cleo’s sisters
offer her their
coppers.

10. C. Serena felt that she had no choice but to give Cleo her copper to
stop Cleo from doing something unsafe. Serena does not want to give
Cleo her copper; rather, Cleo is “compelling unnecessary sacrifice.” Cleo
does so by threatening to do something dangerous.
11. D. Pa could not really afford to give Cleo and her sisters money. The
quote explains that Pa did not really have enough money to give some to
Cleo and her sisters for doing chores. The phrase “dig deep” suggests that
it was a sacrifice for him to do without that money, although he wanted to
be generous. The language in the quote is figurative rather than literal, so
choice (B) is incorrect.
12. B. Cleo’s boldness and her family’s love for her sometimes make them
feel powerless to resist her. This passage is chiefly concerned with
Cleo’s character, which is bold and daring, and with the fact that her
family members clearly love her. Both in the case of Pa giving the girls
coppers and in the case of the sisters giving theirs to Cleo, Cleo’s family
members sometimes feel that they cannot refuse her.
13. D. is a fast and inexpensive way to give that room a whole A hole is a
place that is dug out of the ground; whole means “entire.”
14. D. stripping paint and wallpaper, filling cracks, and adding The verb

“add” should end with -ing to match “stripping” and “filling.” All the
verbs in a series should be in the same form.
15. C. is The sentence should be in the present tense because the rest of the
paragraph is in the present tense.
16. A. missed, and go Choice (A) uses the correct conjunction and correct
verb form.
17. B. are an ideal way for both children and adults The verb “are” agrees
with the plural subject “gardens.”
18. B. would like to start a community garden, first determine whether In
a complex sentence, a comma should follow the dependent clause at the
beginning of the sentence.
19. A. Next, choose a site for the garden. Choice (A) is specific enough to
be clear and general enough to cover all the details in the paragraph. It
also includes a transition from the preceding paragraph.
20. B. Start a new paragraph before sentence 3. The first two sentences are
about the benefits of community gardens. Sentence 3 begins a discussion
of the steps involved in forming a community garden. Thus, a new
paragraph is warranted.
Extended Response Evaluation Guide: Use the Reasoning through
Language Arts Extended Response Evaluation Guide on page 730 to give
your response a score between 0 and 6. Enter your score on the Evaluation
Chart on page 715.
21. D. short-term profitability The last sentence of paragraph 2 states that
“these companies were too focused on their short-term profitability.”
22. A. Getting your product right the first time is more profitable than
fixing mistakes later. The correct answer comes from the first sentence of
paragraph 4: “In the long run, the Detroit automakers learned the hard way
that getting your product right the first time is less costly and more
profitable than retrenching to play catch-up.”
23. C. wanted to build quality cars with few repair problems The U.S.
automakers produced cars with “far more problems than their foreign
equivalents.” This suggests that quality was a priority for the foreign
automakers but not for domestic automakers looking to “keep their costs

low and profits high.”
24. C. emphasize U.S. automakers’ preoccupation with keeping costs low
and profits high in the short term, at the expense of their long-term
outlook “Bean counter” is a derogatory term for an accountant or manager
who is excessively concerned with keeping expenses low. The author uses
this term to underscore the idea that the U.S. automakers failed to consider
the “bigger picture”—that is, failed to consider their long-term outlook.
25.
Causes

Effects

A. U.S.
automakers
manufactured
cars of low
quality.

D. U.S.
automakers
lost business
to foreign
automakers
in the 1970s
and 1980s.

C. A customer has B. A customer
a bad
chooses not
experience
to do
when doing
business
business with a
with a
company.
company.
26. A. critical The authors speak negatively of the cars produced by U.S.
automakers in the 1970s and 1980s and include comments such as “to add
insult to injury” and “weren’t considering the bigger picture.”
27. A. U.S. automakers The last paragraph states that U.S. automakers
eventually “got their act together in the 1990s and have stopped the
erosion of market share.”
28. D. is hoping her mother won’t hear her asking for money The narrator
misinterprets Marjie’s actions. She thinks Marjie is asking for money for
herself, not her mother. She therefore interprets Marjie’s actions as trying

to hide her request from her mother.
29. C. Jennie is perplexed when the narrator blames Marjie. When the
narrator explains that she thought Marjie wanted the money for herself,
“Jennie looked doubtful.”
30. B. discuss it defensively Jennie meets with the narrator directly to try to
explain what happened and express concern. However, she
misunderstands the narrator’s explanation, apologizes for trying to borrow
money, and reacts defensively when it is suggested that her daughter
would ask for money on her own. Jennie would likely have this same
defensive reaction if criticized by a boss.
31. A. the narrator’s thoughts The passage is written with a first person
point of view from the narrator’s perspective. This allows the reader
access to the thoughts of the narrator as well as a description of the action
that the narrator sees.
32. C. They know each other but are not close. The narrator is visiting
Jennie and her family and obviously knows them, yet there is a formal
tone to Jennie’s explanation about borrowing money, and the narrator is
unable to explain how she misunderstood Marjie and is left “floundering.”
Those aspects of their relationship help you infer they are not on close,
intimate terms.
33. C. uncomfortable Jennie feels she has to explain why she was going to
borrow money from the narrator, and the narrator not only misinterprets
Marjie’s actions but has a difficult time explaining to Jennie “the whole of
Marjie’s act.” Jennie appears to doubt her and states her children would
never ask for money, leaving the narrator “floundering a bit.” The entire
situation ends with the narrator (and perhaps even the reader) feeling
uncomfortable over the situation.

34.

Marjie follows the instructions of the older characters. Jennie is defensive
and quick to explain that she normally wouldn’t ask for money or allow
Marjie to. The narrator attempts to smooth over the misunderstanding.

35. C. There may be more people in poverty than the Census Bureau
official estimate suggests. Overall, the passage conveys this main point.
Choices (A) and (B) are details rather than main ideas, and choice (D) is
not supported by the passage.
36. A. The rate of poverty rose during each year from 2007 to 2011. The
main idea of paragraph 1 is that the rate of poverty is increasing. This
detail supports that main idea. Choice (B) is the main idea of paragraph 1.
Choices (C) and (D) are suggested in later paragraphs.
37. C. The bar graph supports the claim that a different way to measure
poverty would produce a different estimate of the rate of poverty. The
bar graph shows that the SPM would produce different estimates of how
many people are poor, a claim that the author makes in paragraph 4.
38. C. Higher rents can cause people to have less money for food.
Paragraph 3 explains that “higher rents may leave individuals with less
money for food”: higher rents are the cause, and less money for food is the
effect. Choices (B) and (D) are too extreme. Choice (A) distorts the
passage: the poverty thresholds measure who is poor—they don’t cause
people to be poor.
39.
Estimates that
would be higher
if the SPM were
adopted

Estimates that
would be lower
if the SPM were
adopted

the overall rate
of poverty

the rate of
poverty among
people under 18

the rate of
poverty among
people 18–64
the rate of
poverty among
people 65 and
older

Only the estimated rate of poverty among people under 18 would be lower
if the SPM were adopted. (In your answer, the items in the left-hand
column do not have to be in the order presented here.)
40. B. The student has overlooked the fact that other factors might impact
how much money local governments receive from the federal
government. The student has read in the passage that government
spending on poverty is affected by the estimated rate of poverty. But even
if the estimated rate of poverty were higher, that does not necessarily
mean that government (at any level) would automatically spend more on
poverty. After all, many factors go into governmental decision-making.
41. C. wants governmental actions to be based on an accurate estimate of
the rate of poverty The author’s chief concern is with the estimated rate
of poverty and whether or not it is accurate. Moreover, the author states in
paragraph 5 that this matters because government spending is involved.
None of the other choices here are supported by the passage.
42. D. how best to spend public money Both writers discuss their thoughts
about the best way to use funds to improve Glenwood.
43. C. Improving them is a good use of funds right now. While both writers
agree that the parks are not in good repair, they disagree over whether
improving them is the best way to use resources at the present time.
44. A. They are good when done in the best locations. The local business
owner doesn’t feel that improving the public parks is the best use of funds
right now, but he does feel that using those resources to improve the
appearance of the business district would contribute to economic growth.
45. B. Investing in our community is important for the future of
Glenwood. Both writers are arguing that public resources should be
invested in improving the community to help ensure its prosperity in the
long term.
46. C. often feel sick when at your workplace? Because the workplace
belongs to you, the possessive pronoun your is correct.
47. A. symptoms seem to disappear magically once you leave work? What
happens magically is that the symptoms disappear, not that you leave

work. Magically should be placed close to the part of the sentence that it
modifies—symptoms disappearing.
48. A. an older building isn’t necessarily immune to A sentence needs both
a subject and a verb. Choices (B) and (C) are missing a noun to serve as
the subject. Choice (D) is incorrect because it adds an unnecessary
comma.
49. D. the windows Using a pronoun instead of the word windows would
make it unclear what it was that originally opened.
50. A. Tourism increases both air pollution and litter, which will further
reduce the animals’ chances for survival. Choice (A) avoids wordiness
while making it clear that tourists cause both pollution and litter.
51. C. remove sentence 7 The flyer focuses on the land on Compton Point.
This sentence about other areas in the county is irrelevant and should be
deleted.
52. B. and influx of tourism resulting from their development would boost
the region’s sagging economy. Choice B smoothly combines the two
ideas into a single sentence with a compound subject.
53. D. Saturday, May 7, in front of the mayor’s office, 34 Wilton Road.
All parts of a proper noun must be capitalized.

Reasoning Through Language Arts Practice Test Evaluation
Charts
Questions 1–53
Circle the numbers of the questions that you got correct and then total them
in the last column of each row.
Content Area

Question Numbers

Number Correct/Total

Interpreting
Nonfiction and
Informational Text
Pages 60–83

2, 3, 5, 21, 22, 23, 24,
25, 26, 27, 36, 38, 39,
41, 44

____/15

Analyzing Nonfiction
and Informational
Text
Pages 84–99

1, 4, 6, 35, 37, 40, 42,
43, 45

____/9

Interpreting Fiction
Pages 100–115

7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 28,
29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34

____/13

Writing Effective
Sentences
Pages 116–133

14, 16, 47, 48, 50, 52

____/6

Connecting Ideas
Pages 134–145

19, 20, 51

____/3

Using Grammar
Correctly
Pages 182–197

15, 17, 49

____/3

Using Writing
Mechanics
Pages 198–211

13, 18, 46, 53

____/4

____/53

SUBTOTAL

Extended Response
Use the evaluation guide on page 730 and assign each category a number 0–
2. Add to find the subtotal. On the GED® Test, your Extended Response
score subtotal will be doubled. Multiply by 2 as shown in the table below.
Writing About Text
Pages 146–171

Creation of
____/2
Arguments and Use of
Evidence

Connecting
Ideas/Polishing Your
Writing
Pages 134–145, 172–
181

Development of Ideas
and Organizational
Structure

____/2

Using Grammar
Correctly/Using
Writing Mechanics
Pages 182–197, 198–
211

Clarity and
Command of
Standard English
Conventions

SUBTOTAL

____/2

____/6. Then multiply
your subtotal by 2:
____/12.

Composite Score
Add both Subtotals to get the total number of points you earned on Reasoning
through Language Arts.
Questions 1–53

____/53

Extended
Response

____/12

TOTAL

____/65

If you do not have time to review the entire Reasoning through Language
Arts unit, you may want to review the sections that need the most work. You
can use your total above (____/65) to figure out your percentage correct for
the entire RLA test. Divide the numerator by the denominator and multiply by
100.
To understand your performance on the practice tests, please see pages 727–
728.

Mathematical Reasoning
Pages 593–605
1. C. $410 Use the formula Simple interest = principal × rate × time. Note
that time is expressed in terms of a year, so
:

which equals $10. This is the interest, so Mike will
pay back the interest plus the $400 principal for a total of $410.
2. B. 58 Plug in the values given for x and y and then follow the order of
operations:
3[2(4) – 5] + (3 + 4)2 = 3(8 – 5) + 72 = 3(3) + 49 = 9 + 49 = 58
3. D. 15x2 − 8xy − 12y2 Use FOIL to distribute the terms in the expression:
(3x)(5x) + (3x)(–6y) + (2y)(5x) + (2y)(–6y) = 15x2 – 18xy + 10xy – 12y2 =
15x2 – 8xy – 12y2
4. C. 48 First, convert the length of the section of fence into inches: 22 × 12
in = 264. That number represents how many inches John must cover with
new boards. Divide that number by the width of each board to find out
how many boards will be required:
.
5. –76 Following the order of operations, first simplify anything in
parentheses:
(4 – 18) becomes –14
Next, simplify any terms with exponents:
52 = 25 and 33 = 27
Now you have:
–3 × 25 + 2(–14) + 27.
Next, do multiplication and division in the order in which they appear:
–3 × 25 = –75 and 2(–14) = –28
Last, add and subtract in the order in which they appear:
–75 + (–28) + 27 = –76.
6. Box A and Box D All boxes share the same first digit in their weight. By
comparing the second digit, you can eliminate Box B. Comparing the third
digit of the remaining choices, you find Box A and Box D are the heaviest
and should be placed on the bottom shelf.
7. 77 Brad’s average golf score would be found like this:

Plug the information you are given in the question into the formula and

solve for the unknown:
78 + 86 + 82 + 81 + 82 + x = 486
409 + x = 486
x = 77
8. C. 4 mph The kayaker traveled for a total of 12 miles: 6 miles upstream
and 6 miles downstream. This took her 3 hours (2 hours upstream + 1 hour
downstream). Divide the distance by the time to find her average rate of
speed per hour:

.

9. 10 Because sides AB and CD are parallel, the figure is a trapezoid. Use the
formula for the area of a trapezoid:
and plug in the
values given:

10. D. 2x(x + y) To begin adding the polynomials together, factor out any like
terms: 2x(x – y + 2y). Then combine any like terms together: 2x(x + y)
11.
Find the average of the three temperatures:

12. 16,384 Calculate: 47 = 4 × 4 × 4 × 4 × 4 × 4 × 4 = 16,384. On the TI-30SX
MultiView™, press
enter . The right side of the display reads
16,384.
13. C. 12 Substitute appropriate values from the spreadsheet, then multiply,
add, and subtract carefully, using order of operations:
–[–2 – (3 – 5) + 3 × (–4)] =
–[–2 – (–2) + (–12)] =
–[– 2 + 2 – 12] =

–[–12] = 12
14. B. 2x4 + 7x3 + 4x Combine like terms from the exponent with the largest
degree, which is 4: 6x4 – 4x4 = 2x4. Combine like terms from the exponent
with the next largest degree, which is 3: 5x3 + 2x3 = 7x3. Finally, combine
the terms from the exponent with the smallest degree: 7x – 3x = 4x. The
simplified polynomial is 2x4 + 7x3 + 4x.
15. D. 150 The perimeter of the trapezoid is given as 50. Since the three sides
shown add up to 38, the remaining side must be 12. The missing side is
the height, so use the height and the two bases in the formula for the area
of a trapezoid, as found on the formula sheet:
.
16. A. $214.40 Substitute 4 for b and 3 for n into the function. Then solve the
equation:
C = $25.60(4) + $14(4)(3 – 1)
= $102.40 + $112.00
= $214.40
17. B. (8, –5) Substitute the x and y values from each ordered pair into the
equation. Only choice (B) makes the equation true:

18. D.

You can use the point-slope form to figure out the slope of

the line first. Use (–6, 0) and (0, 3) as two points:

Now you have the slope of the line, use either of the points to plug into the
equation for a line, y = mx + b. Using (0, 3),

The equation of the line is

.

19. B. 63 The pattern is that the next number is 1 more than double the
previous number. To find the 6th term, use the 5th term, in this case 31. 31
× 2 + 1 = 63.
20.
To determine how much Janice will save, she needs to determine the price
difference between one evening and one afternoon ticket ($24.50 – $19)
and then multiply that number by 6, the total number of tickets she intends
to purchase. Thus, the equation that will supply her total savings is
6($24.50 – $19).
21. 2 Absolute change refers to the difference, either positive or negative,
between two numbers. Over the three elections listed, Party X gained 2
seats, lost 6 seats, and then regained 2 seats. That’s a net loss of 2.
22. B. 28π Use the radius of 2 and the height of 5 in the formula for the
surface area of a cylinder, which can be found on the formula sheet. 2π (2
× 5) + 2π (22) = 20π + 8π = 28π
23. C. x + 3 Every term in the expression is divisible by two, so begin by
simplifying:
fraction and cancel:

. Next, factor the numerator of the
.

24. B. $65,000 About $130,000 was made from catalog sales. About $65,000
was made from online sales. Subtract $65,000 from $130,000.
25. D. The ≤ symbol indicates “greater than or equal to,” which is indicated
with a filled-in dot. The symbol < indicates “less than” (but not equal to),
which is indicated with an open dot.

26. A. (–4, –5) Solve by graphing or by substitution. The point of intersection
will be where the lines cross each other. The lines intersect at the point (–
4, –5). To solve by substitution, use the first equation to substitute the
value of y in the second equation:

Now use that value of x to find the value of y using the first equation:
y = 2(–4) + 3 = –5
The solution of the equation set is (–4, –5).
27. C.

The cable forms the hypotenuse of a triangle with side

lengths of 9 feet and 12 feet. Use the Pythagorean theorem (92 + 122 = c2)
to determine the length of the hypotenuse c:
.
28. 6 This question is simply asking for the number of possible combinations
of two differently colored chairs, so the order of the chairs does not
matter. To determine the number of different pairs of chairs that could be
selected for the design, draw a table to illustrate the possibilities. There are
six possible ways that two different chairs could be chosen for Meg’s
design.
Yellow

Red

Green

Blue

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X

X

X
X

X

29. A. $600 Find 24% of $2,500. $2,500 × 0.24 = $600 You could estimate
this answer by thinking 24% is roughly , and choice (A) is closest to
one-fourth of the Whitman’s budget.
30. $7.50 Six boxes of pasta will be purchased: 3 of ziti and 3 of spaghetti. Set
up the proportion
where x is the price of 6 boxes of pasta. Crossmultiply and divide to solve for x: 5 × 6 = 30 and 30 ÷ 4 = 7.5.
31. Place four additional dots on the dot plot to represent the data. Count this
question as correct only if you placed all of the dots properly.

32. C. 12 The formula for the area of a circle is A = π r2 where r refers to the
radius of the circle. The diameter of a circle (a straight line segment that
goes from one edge of the circle to the other and passes through the center
of the circle) is 2r, or two times the length of the radius. The circle shown
in this problem has an area of 36π. Plug that into the area formula and find
the length of the circle’s radius:

Now that you know the radius has a length of 6, multiply that length by 2
to get the diameter:

6 × 2 = 12
The diameter of the circle has a length of 12.
33. 2.8% To calculate the percent increase or decrease from Karen’s 2011
earnings to her 2012 earnings, first find exactly how much she earned in
each year. In 2011, she earned $52,500 + $6,250, which equals $58,750.
In 2012, she earned $56,300 + $4,100, which equals $60,400.
To calculate the percent change from 2011 to 2012, use the percent change
formula:
In this case, that gives you

which equals .028, or

2.8%.
34.
Imtaez would make 50 cents, or $0.50, for each dinner, d, ordered. He will
need to sell 10 dinner specials in order to start earning the bonus, so the
bonus will be 10 × $0.50 = $5 less than 0.50d, or b = 0.50d – 5.
35. Place a dot on the graph as shown:

You can solve either by graphing the lines or by substitution. To solve by
substitution, use the first equation to substitute the value of y in the second
equation:

Now use that value of x to find the value of y using the first equation:
y=6+4
y = 10
36. D. 28% Probability is the ratio of the number of favorable outcomes to the
number of possible outcomes. Add up the numbers of marbles to find out
how many marbles are in the bag. 12 + 3 + 6 + 4 = 25. Therefore, 25 is the
number of possible outcomes. 7 marbles are either blue or yellow. 7 is the
number of favorable outcomes.
, or 28%.

37. D. 514 To find the volume of a cone, use the formula from the formula
sheet:
. Plug in values from the question stem and the approximate
value of pi:

38. 720 This question asks how many orderings, or permutations, of three out
of ten are possible. Multiply: 10 × 9 × 8 = 720.
39. Place a dot on the number line as shown below:

Archie is giving away half his chili:

. So he will have one

half left over.
40. C. 240 Use the percent formula,

. We are given the

part and the percent, and are solving for the whole.

41. C. $113.75 It takes Fabio 45 minutes, or of an hour to install a hard
drive. It takes him exactly one hour to install an operating system. It will
take him
hours to complete the job. Since he charges $65 per hour,
multiply

by $65 to find the total charge:

42. D. 1.335 × 109 You move the decimal point 9 places to the left to get
1.335. Multiply this by 109 to get the scientific notation 1.335 × 109.
43. –2 To find slope, calculate

. In this case, the line moves up two units

for each unit it moves to the left. Thus, the slope is negative:
44. D. −8 and −12 To solve this system of linear equations, first write two
equations with the information given. Call the numbers x and y. The first
sentence tells you that x = 12 + 3y, and the second sentence tells you that x
+ y = –20.
Rewrite the second equation so that x is isolated on one side of the equals
sign: x = –20 – y. Now that each equation is written in terms of x, set the
two expressions for x equal to each other: 12 + 3y = –20 – y.
Simplify this equation: 4y = –32, so y = –8. Substitute this value for y back
into the second equation: x + –8 = –20, so x must equal –12.
45. D. –9 and 2 To find the solutions to this quadratic equation, start by
setting it equal to 0. The equation then becomes 3x2 + 21x – 54 = 0. Then,
divide each term by 3 to make the equation x2 + 7x – 18 = 0.
Now that the x2 term has a coefficient of 1, factor the equation into two
terms: (x + 9)(x – 2).
So x + 9 = 0, and x – 2 = 0. x = – 9 and x = 2. The correct answer is D.
46. Match the solutions to the equations:
Equation

Value of the Variable

Explanation

x–2=9

11

x–2+2=9+2
x = 11

50
3y = –21

–7

14 + m = 6

–8

14 + m – 14 = 6 – 14
m = –8

Mathematical Reasoning Practice Test Evaluation Charts

Circle the numbers of the questions that you answered correctly and then
total them in the last column of each row.
Content Area

Question Numbers

Number Correct/Total

Number Sense and
Problem Solving
Pages 218–237

6, 8

____/2

Decimals and
Fractions
Pages 238–259

4, 39, 41

____/3

Ratio, Proportion,
and Percent
Pages 260–279

1, 30, 33, 40

____/4

Data, Statistics, and
Probability
Pages 280–314

7, 24, 28, 29, 31, 36, 38 ____/7

Algebra Basics,
Expressions, and
Polynomials
Pages 316-351

2, 3, 5, 10, 11, 12, 13,
14, 20, 21, 23, 42

____/12

Equations,
Inequalities, and
Functions
Pages 352–387

16, 17, 18, 19, 25, 26,
34, 35, 43, 44, 45, 46

____/12

Geometry
Pages 388–412

9, 15, 22, 27, 32, 37

____/6

TOTAL

____/46

If you do not have time to review the entire Mathematical Reasoning unit,
you may want to review the sections that need the most work. You can use
your total above (____/46) to figure out your percentage correct for the entire
Mathematical Reasoning test. Divide the numerator by the denominator and
multiply by 100.

To understand your performance on the practice tests, please see pages 727–
728.

Social Studies
Pages 606–617
1. D. The United States had an unfavorable balance of trade in
merchandise during the 2000s. According to the passage, the balance of
trade is the difference between exports and imports. When imports are
greater than exports, the balance of trade is unfavorable. Since the graph
shows that imports consistently exceeded exports during the 2000s, you
can conclude that the balance of trade in merchandise was unfavorable
during the decade.
2. 39 To calculate the average percent of people surveyed who considered
themselves independents, add up the January – June numbers, 38 + 38 +
36 + 40 + 39 + 41 = 232. Divide 232 by the total number of terms, 6, and
round to the nearest percentage to get 39 percent.
3. Look for the continent with the highest percentage of countries colored in
the lightest gray. Place a dot on Africa.
4.
Highest

United States

Second
highest

Mexico

Third highest

India

Lowest

Democratic
Republic of Congo

5. 2.1 The median is the middle number in a set of numbers. Here, the
question asks for the median in the percent change figures, or the third
column. Arrange those numbers in order, and 2.1 will be the middle
number.

6. 1870, 1965 The 15th Amendment (1870) and the Voting Rights Act of
1965 expanded the right to vote.
7. B. Both valued a stable political framework for society. The paragraph
indicates that this was one thing the ancient Chinese and the ancient
Greeks had in common.
8. C. The war created a huge demand for military equipment and
supplies. The chart shows that there was a substantial increase in
manufacturing output between 1939 (when World War II began in
Europe) and 1941. Even though the United States did not enter the war
until late 1941, industry had already geared up to sell equipment and
supplies to the Allies in Europe. Choices (A) and (B) may be true, but do
not explain the war's impact.
9. A. patriotism The tendency of the American public to support a
president’s emergency foreign policy actions is sometimes called the
“rally ’round the flag” effect.
10. B. problems with consistently enforcing the Sherman Antitrust Act
led to further legislation to prevent monopolies In the passage, the
author explains the intention behind the Sherman Antitrust Act: to make
monopolies illegal. He goes on to outline the limitations of the act, arguing
that its broad language rendered it insufficient to solve the problems
created by monopolies. He concludes the paragraph by telling how
Congress responded to the problems in the Sherman Antitrust Act by
passing additional laws to control monopolistic practices.
11.
The author would
agree with this
statement:

The author would
disagree with this
statement:

The author does not
address this
information:

B. The dangers of
climate change are
more significant than
the possible benefits.

A. The United States
has failed to take any
action against carbon
emissions.

C. Wind energy is
preferable to solar
energy.

D. Climate change will
not impact the world

food supply.
12. B. Whites wanted to take over Indian lands in the eastern states. The
graphic shows the Indians being moved away from eastern states to
Kansas and Oklahoma. The question asks about “forcible” relocation, so
the correct answer can’t be about what Indians wanted.
13. D. the Seminole The Seminole tribe’s home territory was in Florida,
which was farthest from the new, government-declared Indian Territory in
the Midwest.
14. C. Special interest groups are treated better than voters by members
of Congress. The cartoonist is using irony in the caption to indicate that
he thinks members of Congress treat voters badly, but treat people who
represent special interest groups well.
15. C. Industrialization and urbanization caused many changes in family
life in the late 1800s. This covers the main points of the passage, which
discusses the impact of industrialization and urbanization on the American
family. The other choices are all supporting details.
16. C. It did not impose direct economic costs on the colonists. All of the
other acts of Parliament shown in the chart cost the colonists money,
whether by having to pay import taxes, buy revenue stamps, or use their
own resources to shelter British soldiers.
17. A. the Declaration of Independence, which explained why the colonies
broke away from Great Britain The acts of Parliament listed in the chart
were grievances used to justify declaring independence.
18. A. 0% to 4% First find the United States on the map and see what shade
it is colored.
Then consult the map key to see the percentage of undernourished people
that shade represents. The map indicates that the percentage range is 0% to
4%.
19. D. Hunger is a major problem in many countries in Africa. More than
20 nations in Africa have a very high percentage of undernourished
people. The remaining options are not supported by the data on the map.
20. C. Both established methods of self-government in the English

colonies. Both documents set forth rules and laws for the self-government
of specific English colonies.
21. D. the English Bill of Rights The English Bill of Rights tied the king’s
right to rule to the consent of the people’s representatives, and the
colonists’ major grievance was taxation without representation. The
colonists felt they should be granted the same representation and rights as
other British citizens, which were listed in the English Bill of Rights.
22. A. the Magna Carta The Magna Carta, signed in 1215, was the first
document to set limits on the British king’s powers.
23. D. Slavery destroyed the culture of the slaves, diminishing their selfrespect. According to the paragraph, this is an opinion, or belief, held by
some historians. The other choices are all facts stated in the paragraph.
24. B. 30 cents According to the passage, market price is reached under
equilibrium conditions—when supply equals demand. According to the
graph, supply and demand cross each other—and so are equal—at 30
cents.
25. D. The market price would go up. When the supply decreases and
demand stays the same, the market price increases. The same number of
people want to buy fewer apples, so the people will generally be willing to
pay more for the apples.
26.
Belonged to the
Confederacy
before the
Battle of Fort
Sumter

Belonged to the
Confederacy
after the Battle
of Fort Sumter

Alabama

Alabama
North Carolina

Iowa and Delaware never seceded, so they never belonged to the
Confederacy. Alabama seceded before the Battle of Fort Sumter, so it
belonged to the Confederacy both before and after the Battle of Fort

Sumter. North Carolina also belonged to the Confederacy, but it didn’t
secede until after the Battle of Fort Sumter.
27. C. the Court of International Trade “International trade” is commerce
with foreign companies, so the case would most likely be filed in the
Court of International Trade.
28. B. The volume and variety of federal cases were too great for a single
court to handle. It would be impractical to have just one court handling
all cases; the workload would be too great.
29. A. the Supreme Court of the United States According to the passage,
cases are appealed to higher level courts; according to the diagram, the
Supreme Court is the highest court of appeal.
30. B. The war effort needs the help of everyone, including men, women,
and children. The focus of the poster is to enlist the help of everyone in
the country for the war effort. The sleeping woman represents an
American population that needs to take action.
31. D. at 0° latitude On both of these projections the distortions are greatest
near the north and south poles. Along the equator (0° latitude), the maps
look most alike and most similar to a globe; the distortions increase as you
go north or south toward the poles.
32. B. The interrupted projection distorts distances across the oceans. The
interrupted projection was a poor choice because ocean areas are cut apart
on the map, making it very difficult to measure distances on an aroundthe-world voyage.
33. The one segment (the bottom right box) of the Roman frontier that the
map legend identifies as land frontiers would see “Heavy” fortification,
the one river frontier (the top right box) would see “Light” fortification,
and the two sea coasts (the two left-hand boxes) would see “None.” Rivers
served as natural barriers, making fortifications less necessary, and the
emperors saw no need to defend ocean frontiers.
34. C. The Fifth Amendment applies to the federal government, and the
Fourteenth Amendment, to state governments. According to the
passage, this is one of the main differences between the two amendments.

Social Studies Practice Test Evaluation Charts
Questions 1–34
Circle the numbers of the questions that you got correct and then total them
in the last column of each row.
United
States
History
Pages
438–451

Civics and
Economics Geography Number
Government Pages 466– and the
Correct/Total
Pages 452–
477
World
465
Pages 478–
493

Determine
Central Idea
and Draw
Conclusions
Pages 420–
421

10, 15

7, 17

(no
questions)

(no
questions)

____/4

Interpret
Words and
Ideas
Pages 422–
423

12

9, 16, 20, 27

8, 25

33

____/8

14

(no
questions)

(no
questions)

____/3

21, 28, 34

1

32

____/6

Social
Studies
Practices

Analyze
11, 30
Author’s
Purpose and
Point of View
Pages 424–
425
Evaluate
Author’s

23

Reasoning
and Evidence
Pages 426–
427
Analyze
13, 26
Relationships
Between
Materials
Pages 428–
431

6, 22, 29

3, 4, 24

18, 19, 31

____/11

____/2

Interpret
Data and
Statistics
Pages 432–
433

(no
2
questions)

5

(no
questions)

SUBTOTAL

____/8

____/7

____/5

____/14

If you do not have time to review the entire Social Studies unit, you may
want to review the sections that need the most work. You can use your total
above (____/34) to figure out your percentage correct for the entire Social
Studies test. Divide the numerator by the denominator and multiply by 100.
To understand your performance on the practice tests, please see pages 727–
728.
Pages 618–629
1. A. lift As the diagram shows and the paragraph implies, the wing's weight
and the opposing force of the air under it result in an upward force called
lift.
2. C. “Why We Sleep“ The topic of the paragraph is why sleep evolved in
humans, and the paragraph cites several reasons for sleeping. The other
options are too specific.
3. 17 If the mean is 23 degrees, then the sum of all six angle measurements
must be 23 × 6 = 138 degrees. Since the five given angles add up to 121

degrees, the sixth angle must make up the difference, or 138 – 121 = 17
degrees.
4. B. the air and rainwater in the soil According to the diagram, nitrogenfixing bacteria take nitrogen from both the air and rain found in soil.
5. C. The recycling of nitrogen through the biosphere involves many
complex processes. This is a general statement, or conclusion, that is
supported by the various details in the diagram. The other statements are
details from the diagram.
6. B. compost with plant and animal wastes According to the diagram,
plant and animal waste contains nitrogen compounds that decomposers,
including nitrite bacteria and nitrate bacteria, break down. In this way,
composting with plant and animal wastes results in the addition of usable
forms of nitrogen to the soil. So composting with organic waste (plant and
animal materials) would be an alternative to synthetic fertilizers.
7. D. For the three compounds shown, solubility increases as
temperature increases. The graph shows all three substances having
increased solubility as the temperature rises from 0°C to 50°C. None of
the other statements is supported by information in the graph.
8.
Step of the
Scientific
Method

The Scientist’s
Action

Step 1.
Formulate a
question about a
phenomenon

B. The scientist
wondered
whether water at
different
temperatures
might affect
houseplants
differently.

Step 2. Collect
data

C. The scientist
researched the
growth rate of

plants at various
greenhouses,
some of which
use cool water
and some of
which use warm
water to water
their plants.
Step 3. Form a
hypothesis

E. The scientist
guessed that
warm water
might be better
for plants than
cool water.

Step 4. Test the
hypothesis
through an
experiment

A. For 6 weeks,
the scientist used
water at 75
degrees to water
plants in Group
A and used water
at 55 degrees to
water plants in
Group B. He
recorded their
growth during
this period.

Step 5. Draw a
conclusion

D. At the end of
6 weeks, the
plants in Group
A were, on
average, 2” taller
than plants in
Group B. The
scientist
interpreted this to
mean that warm

water is better
for plants than
cool water.
9. A. Its charge would become positive. If an atom loses an electron, it has
more protons than electrons, and thus it has a net positive charge. (Such an
atom is called a positive ion.)
10. A. the cracking of granite from the expansion of freezing water This is
an example of physical weathering because it involves changes of
temperature causing physical effects on rock. Choice (C) is not an
example of weathering because transport is involved.
11. C. how special fluids keep insects alive during subfreezing weather
Understanding how insects can survive freezing may be a key to finding a
way to freeze organs without destroying them.
12. B. sea star Of the four animals shown, only the sea star has a center
section from which similar parts radiate. All the other animals are
bilaterally symmetrical.
13. C. Hydrogen peroxide is decomposing into water and oxygen. The
chemical reaction begins on the left hand side of the equation, which
represents two hydrogen peroxide molecules. Thus, it is incorrect to say
that hydrogen peroxide is being made (choices (A) or (D)). Rather,
hydrogen peroxide is decomposing, or breaking up, into two substances.
What remains after the chemical reaction is written on the right hand side
of the equation. The question stem explains that water is composed of two
hydrogen atoms and an oxygen atom, so the results of the reaction are
water and O2, which you can infer represents oxygen. Choice (B) is
incomplete and (C) is correct.
14. A. Mercury and bromine are liquids at room temperature. Room
temperature is about 70°F. The chart indicates that both mercury and
bromine are liquids at that temperature: each has a melting point—the
temperature at which it becomes a liquid—well below room temperature.
15. D. Bacteria quickly evolved resistance to antibiotic drugs. In 1969, the
Surgeon General did not anticipate that bacteria would evolve to be
resistant to the antibiotics that had been so effective until that time.

16. B. The student should have used books of the same height for all of
the ramps. The height of the ramp affects how far the ball rolls. So the
height of the ramp should be a controlled variable in this experiment. By
using one ramp that is not as high as the others, the student is introducing
a second variable into the experiment, which makes her data invalid for
the ramp that is lower than the others.
17. C. Both balls will have the same speed. The acceleration of a freely
falling object, in the absence of any other forces (such as air resistance), is
simply 9.8 m/s2, often denoted by the constant g. Since both balls will
accelerate at the same rate, their speeds after falling 2 meters will be the
same.
18. D. High On the blood pressure chart, the vertical axis is systolic blood
pressure and the horizontal axis is diastolic blood pressure. The first
number of the patient's blood pressure (130) corresponds to the systolic
blood pressure; the second number of the patient's blood pressure (100)
corresponds to the diastolic blood pressure. Draw a horizontal line from
130 and a vertical line up from 100. These two lines intersect in the region
labeled High.
19. B. 25 The pH of the solution is given on the vertical axis. When the
solution is neutralized, the pH is 7, so draw a horizontal line from 7 on the
vertical axis to the titration curve and draw a vertical line down from the
point of intersection to determine the volume of reagent needed. The line
falls between 20 and 30 mL. Only 25 falls within this range.
20. D. The dog has canines and the sheep does not. If you compare the two
diagrams, you will see that the sheep does not have any canines; instead
the sheep has a large gap where the canines would be.
21. C. The five largest asteroids are all farther from the sun than Earth is.
According to the chart, Earth’s distance from the sun is set at 1, so any
value greater than 1 indicates that the asteroid is farther from the sun than
Earth is. All the asteroids have distance values of 2 or greater, so they are
all farther from the sun than Earth is.
22. less than If all the lobsters weighed the maximum of 9 lbs, the 220 million
pounds of lobster would still account for more than 20 million individual
animals. Two blue lobsters out of 20 million lobsters is substantially less

likely than the estimated 1 in 2 million occurrence of the blue mutation.
23. A. Pressure builds up inside the magma chamber and vent. If you
examine the diagram, you will see that hot magma wells up into the
volcano’s cone. You need to infer that when the pressure builds up
sufficiently, the volcano explodes, or erupts. None of the other events
described would cause a violent explosion from the inside of the volcano.
24. B. when food is digested, as when an enzyme in saliva called ptyalin
breaks down starch into sugars without itself changing The catalyst is
the enzyme ptyalin; you can identify ptyalin as the catalyst, because it aids
the chemical reaction of digestion but itself remains unchanged after the
reaction. None of the other reactions include a substance that remains
unchanged.
25. B. People can reduce their chances of developing age-related hearing
loss by not smoking. Of all the options, this is the only one that is a
hypothesis that the researchers could have been testing with their
experiment. Choice (A) is too general to be a hypothesis for this
experiment and is stated more like a conclusion than a hypothesis. The
other options are facts relating to the study.
26. D. Humans contain a higher percentage of carbon than bacteria do.
To find the correct answer, you must check each statement against the
graphs to see whether the information in the graphs supports the statement.
The graphs show that humans have a higher percentage of carbon than
bacteria have.
27. B. Both involve effort applied with circular motion. The diagrams show
that the effort applied to each of these machines is circular.
28. A. During an ice age, temperatures drop and ice covers vast areas of
Earth. According to the passage, scientists aren’t sure what causes ice
ages. Choices (B), (C), and (D) each offer a different hypothesis for what
causes an ice age. By contrast, choice (A) is an objective fact.
29. D. The arrangement of the carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen atoms in the
two hydrocarbons is different. Although ether and ethanol both have the
same number of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen atoms, the different
arrangements of atoms in each compound results in two substances with
different properties.

30. D. Observation is useful as long as the results are used to support or
disprove a hypothesis. According to Darwin’s remarks, it is a waste of
time to observe phenomena if you do not use what you observe to evaluate
your theories.
31.
Type of Process

Example of
Process

Magmatic

B. A gradual
increase in
temperature in
the mantle,
followed by a
sudden drop in
temperature

Hydrothermal

C. Movement of
seawater through
fractured rock
underground

Metamorphic

D. Fault lines
fracturing rock
into particles
underground,
and then those
particles
undergoing great
heat and
pressure

Surficial

A. Wind eroding
away the softer
components in
sandstone

32. Crescent City Begin by finding each increase in rainfall:

Crescent City

13.42

Eureka

14.76

Ukiah

17.84

Redding

6.74

Sacramento

4.41

The median is the middle value in a group of numbers. Arrange the
numbers above in order; the middle value belongs to Crescent City.
33.
Experiment
Outline

Brock’s Steps

Step 1. Formulate
a question about a
phenomenon

D. Brock asked,
“Does size
affect the
buoyancy of an
object in
water?”

Step 2. Collect
data

B. Brock noted
that ice floats in
water, whether
it is a small ice
cube or a huge
iceberg.

Step 3. Form a
hypothesis

E. Brock
thought: “For
an object made
of a given
material,
increasing the
size of the
object won’t
affect its

buoyancy in
water.”
Step 4. Test the
hypothesis
through an
experiment

A. Brock
placed wooden
cubes that were
1 cc, 10 cc, and
100 cc in water.
He observed
their buoyancy.
Then he placed
iron cubes of 1
cc, 10 cc, and
100 cc in water
and observed
their buoyancy.

Step 5. Draw a
conclusion

C. Brock said:
“Since all
wooden cubes
float and all
iron cubes sink,
size does not
affect the
buoyancy of an
object in
water.”

34.

Since the dam was built to stop fluctuation, or change, in reservoir levels,
1993 must be the final year that reservoir levels changed.
35. A. A teacher’s perfume can be detected at the back of the classroom.
This is an example of diffusion, the spreading of gas molecules (perfume
vapor) throughout a container (the classroom).
36. B. 3.56 × 1022 N Plug the given values into the formula:

Questions 1–36
Circle the numbers of the questions that you got correct and then total them in
the last column of each row.
Life
Science
Pages 518–
537

Earth and
Space
Science
Pages 538–
551

Physical
Science
Pages 552–
567

Number
Correct/Total

Comprehend
Scientific
Presentations
Pages 500–501

2, 4, 18, 20,
26

23

1, 19, 27

____/9

Use the
Scientific
Method
Pages 502–505

8, 11, 25

30, 31

16, 33

____/7

Science
Practices

Reason with
Scientific
Information
Pages 506–507

5, 15

21, 28

7, 9, 14, 17

____/8

Express and
Apply
Scientific
Information
Pages 508–509

6, 12

10, 34

24, 29, 35

____/7

Use Statistics
and
Probability
Pages 510–511

22

32

3

____/3

13, 36

____/2

Apply
Scientific
Formulas
Pages 512–513
SUBTOTAL

____/13

____/8

____/15

Science Composite Score
Add your Subtotals to get the total number of points you earned on the
Science Test.
If you do not have time to review the entire Science unit, you may want to
review the sections that need the most work. You can use your total above
(____/36) to figure out your percentage correct for the entire Science test.
Divide the numerator by the denominator and multiply by 100.
To understand your performance on the practice tests, please see pages 727–
728.

Evaluating Your Practice Tests
The following is some useful information about evaluating your performance
on your GED practice tests:

Scoring is based on the number of points a test-taker earns in each
section rather than on the number of questions the test-taker gets
correct. Different questions have different point values. For example,
questions in which a test-taker is asked to fill in two blanks or choose
options from two drop-down menus are worth two points.
The number of questions a test-taker will see on test day may vary from
one form of the test to another. What remains the same across different
test forms is the number of points on each test. The total number of
points available on each test is as follows:
Reasoning Through Language Arts: 65 raw points
Mathematical Reasoning: 49 raw points
Social Studies: 44 raw points
Science: 40 raw points
The number of points a test-taker earns is translated into a scaled score,
on a scale of 100 to 200 for each subject test:
100–144: below passing
145–164: passing / high school equivalency
165–174: GED® College Ready
175–200: GED® College Ready + Credit
Test-takers must earn a minimum of 145 on each subject test in order to
pass overall. It is no longer the case (as it may have been in the past)
that a high score on one test can compensate for a below-passing score
on another test. If a test-taker scores below 145 on any of the subject
tests, the test-taker must retake those subject tests regardless of her
performance on other subject tests.
While the number of raw points needed to earn a 145, 165, or 175 on each
subject test is confidential test-maker information, we can make inferences
regarding the performance levels that will be required for test-takers to pass.
Please see the next page for this information.
We also encourage test-takers to take the GED Ready™ Official Practice
Tests as a final step before scheduling their actual GED® Test. You can
register for the GED Ready™ Official Practice Tests at https://ged.com.
For each subject test from Kaplan’s book or website:

If you got this
percentage of
questions correct . . .

then you are . . .

Kaplan recommends .
..

0% to 50%

unlikely to pass that
subject test on Test
Day.

an in-depth review of
the subject matter. Be
sure to look for
commonalities among
the questions you got
wrong, and study those
topics in greater depth.
Review the questions
you got wrong on the
practice tests until you
understand how to
avoid similar mistakes
in the future.

50% to 65%

somewhat unlikely to
pass that subject on
Test Day, but this is
still uncertain.

setting a goal by which
you would like to
complete a final review
of the material. As you
do that review, focus on
the material you have
struggled with the most.
Review the questions
you got wrong on the
practice tests until you
understand how to
avoid similar mistakes
in the future.

65% to 75%

moderately likely to
pass that subject on
Test Day.

considering scheduling
a date to take that
subject test. You may
want to give yourself a
few more days or weeks
to do a final
comprehensive review

of this subject before
testing. If you must take
all the GED® subject
tests at the same time,
be sure to review this
material once per week
as you prepare for the
other subject tests.
75% or higher

highly likely to pass on considering scheduling
Test Day.
this subject test for the
near future. If you do,
be sure to do a
comprehensive, highlevel review of the
material and a final
brush-up of any
concepts you’ve
struggled with before
test day. Also, get
yourself ready to test by
getting on a regular
sleep schedule, keeping
yourself healthy, and
managing stress. If you
must wait before taking
the official GED® Test
for this subject, review
the material once per
week until Test Day so
that your skills do not
rust.

GED® Test Resources
Reasoning through Language Arts Extended
Response Evaluation Guide
You can use this guide to evaluate your own writing. You can also provide
the guide to another person whom you ask to read your paper. Read a paper
three times—once for each trait. Circle a score for each trait in the chart at the
bottom of this page. Add to find your total score and then analyze your
results.
Trait 1 – Creation of Arguments and Use of Evidence
Rate the response as 2, 1, or 0 based on these criteria:
2 – makes text-based argument with clear thesis; uses relevant and
specific evidence from the text; analyzes the validity of the claims and
reasoning in the source text(s)
1 – makes argument with some connection to text; cites some relevant
evidence; makes limited analysis of the claims and reasoning in the source
text(s)
0 – makes little or no argument with minimal or irrelevant evidence from
the text; makes little or no analysis of the claims and reasoning in the
source text(s)
Trait 2 – Development of Ideas and Organizational Structure
Rate the response as 2, 1, or 0 based on these criteria:
2 – demonstrates logical organization; uses a clear progression of ideas
with well-chosen transitions; uses adequate supporting details and
connects them to the main idea; utilizes appropriate style, tone, and word
choice

1 – demonstrates inconsistent organization with vague reasoning; uses
disjointed ideas with few transitions; contains some supporting details but
may not explain their connection to the main idea; utilizes inappropriate
style or tone and vague and misused word choice
0 – demonstrates insufficient or illogical development with unclear
progression of ideas; uses few, no, or irrelevant supporting details;
utilizes incorrect or inappropriate style, tone, and word choice
Trait 3 – Clarity and Command of Standard English Conventions
Rate the response as 2, 1, or 0 based on these criteria:
2 – exhibits mainly correct and varied sentence structure; avoids
awkward or overly wordy constructions; uses transitional words and
phrases to connect ideas; competent application of grammar,
capitalization, punctuation, and spelling - with some mistakes allowed
1 – exhibits inconsistent control of sentence structure; may display some
awkward or wordy constructions; inconsistent use of transitional words
and phrases; frequent errors in grammar, capitalization, punctuation,
and spelling
0 – exhibits flawed or highly repetitive sentence structure; may use overly
wordy, awkward, or confusing constructions; lacks transitional words
and phrases; little or no control of grammar, capitalization, punctuation,
and spelling
Trait

Circle Score

1

012

2

012

3

012

Added Total

Analysis of Score Total
0 to 3 Weak – needs improvement with all three traits
4 to 5 Fair – needs work with traits with a score of 0 or 1
6 Strong – mastery of all three traits

NOTE: This guide is Kaplan’s simplified interpretation of the official GED® Reasoning through
Language Arts Extended Response rubric. It has been developed for ease of use in evaluating extended
written responses to one passage or paired passages.

GED® Test Mathematics Formula Sheet

TI-30XS Calculator Reference Sheet

An on-screen calculator reference sheet, similar to what appears on these two
pages, will be available to you on Test Day. However, you should understand
how to use the calculator before you take the GED® Test. Refer to the
Mathematical Reasoning Unit on pages 213–413 for information about how
to use the Texas Instruments TI-30XS MultiViewTM calculator.
To perform basic arithmetic, enter numbers and operation symbols using the
standard order of operations.

To perform calculations with powers and roots, you will use the following
keys:

Æ Symbol Tool Explanation
Starting in 2014, test-takers will take the GED® Test on the computer. On
the computer-based test, some fill-in-the-blank questions require you to insert
mathematical symbols.
You can access the “Symbol Selector” by clicking on this icon when it
appears on the computer screen:

Choose the symbol you want, and click on Insert at the bottom of the screen.
When you are done, close the screen.

Below are the meanings of the symbols. Learn the meanings before you take
the test because only the symbols will be available to you.

